Manipuri dance, also referred to as the  Manipuri Raas Leela (Meitei: Jagoi Raas/Raas Jagoi), is a jagoi and is one of the major Indian classical dance forms, originating from the state of Manipur. It is one of the greatest cultural achievements of the traditional Vaishnavism adhering Meitei people of Manipur. Owing to the Meitei civilization, the classical dance form, first formally developed by Meitei Hindu king Ching Thang Khomba (Meitei for 'Rajarshi Bhagyachandra') of the Kingdom of Manipur, is considered to be the highest spiritual expression of the worship of Hindu deity Krishna. 
Owing to its huge influences on the diverse cultural heritages across the Indian subcontinent, it is recognised by the Sangeet Natak Akademi of the Ministry of Culture of the Government of India as one of the few primary classical dance forms of the Republic of India, and is honoured with the Sangeet Natak Akademi Award for Manipuri annually.
It is referred to as the ""national dance"" during the Armenia-India joint issue of postage stamps, as a part of the Armenia-India international relations.
It is imbued with the devotional themes of Madhura Raas of Radha-Krishna and characterised by gentle eyes and soft peaceful body movements. The facial expressions are peaceful mostly expressing Bhakti Rasa or the emotion of devotion, no matter if a dancer is Hindu or not. The dance form is based on Hindu scriptures of Vaishnavism and is exclusively attached to the worship of Radha and Krishna. It is a portrayal of the dance of divine love of Krishna with goddess Radha and the cowherd damsels of Vrindavan, famously known as the Raas Leela.
The roots of the Manipuri Raas Leela dance, as with all classical Indian dances, is the ancient Hindu Sanskrit text Natya Shastra, with influences and the culture fusion between various local folk dance forms. With evidence of Vishnu temples in the medieval era, this dance form has been passed down verbally from generation to generation as an oral tradition. At a time when other Indian classical dances were struggling to shake off the stigma of decadent crudity and disrepute, the Manipuri classical dance was a top favorite with girls of 'respectable' families.
This Manipuri dance drama is, for most part is entirely religious and is considered to be a purely spiritual experience. It is accompanied with devotional music created with many instruments, with the beat set by cymbals (kartal or manjira) and double-headed drum (pung or Manipuri mrdanga) of sankirtan. The dance drama choreography shares the plays and stories of Vaishnavite Padavalis, that also inspired the major Gaudiya Vaishnava-related performance arts found in Assam and West Bengal.
Though the term  Manipuri Dance is associated with the Raas Leela, Manipuri dance consists of jagoi, cholom and huyen langlon.
The first reliably dated written texts describing the art of Manipuri dance are from the early 18th-century.
Historical texts of Manipur have not survived into the modern era, and reliable records trace to early 18th century. Theories about the antiquity of Manipuri Raas Leela dance rely on the oral tradition, archaeological discoveries and references about Manipur in Asian manuscripts whose date can be better established.
The Meitei language text Bamon Khunthok, which literally means ""Brahmin migration"", states that Vaishnavism practices were adopted by the king of Manipur in the 15th century CE, arriving from Shan Kingdom of Pong. Further waves of Buddhists and Hindus arrived from Assam and Bengal, after mid 16th-century during Hindu-Muslim wars of Bengal Sultanate, and were welcomed in Manipur. In 1704, the Meitei King Pitambar Charairongba (Meitei: Charairongba) adopted Vaishnavism, and declared it to be the state religion. In 1717, the Meitei King Gareeb Niwaz (Meitei: Pamheiba) converted to Chaitanya style devotional Vaishnavism, which emphasized singing, dancing and religious performance arts centered around Hindu god Krishna. In 1734, devotional dance drama centered around Hindu god Rama expanded Manipuri dance tradition.
Meitei King Rajarshi Bhagyachandra (Meitei: Ching-Thang Khomba) (r. 1759–1798 CE) of Manipur State adopted Gaudiya Vaishnavism (Krishna oriented), documented and codified the Manipuri dance style, launching the golden era of its development and refinement. He composed three of the five types of Raas Leelas, the Maha Raas, the Basanta Raas and the Kunja Raas, performed at the Sri Sri Govindaji temple in Imphal during his reign and also the Achouba Bhangi Pareng dance. He designed an elaborate costume known as Kumil (the cylindrical long mini-mirror-embellished stiff skirt costume, that makes the dancer appear to be floating). The Govinda Sangeet Lila Vilasa, an important text detailing the fundamentals of the dance, is also attributed to him. Rajarshi Bhagyachandra is also credited with starting public performances of Raas Leela and Manipuri dances in Hindu temples.
Meitei King Gambhir Singh (Meitei: Chinglen Nongdrenkhomba) (r. 1825–1834 CE) composed two parengs of the tandava type, the Goshtha Bhangi Pareng and the Goshtha Vrindaban Pareng. King Chandrakirti Singh (r. 1849–1886 CE), a gifted drummer, composed at least 64 Pung choloms (drum dances) and two parengs of the Lasya type, the Vrindaban Bhangi Pareng and Khrumba Bhangi Pareng. The composition of the Nitya Raas is also attributed to these kings.
In 1891, the British colonial government annexed Manipur into its Empire, marking an end to its golden era of creative systematization and expansion of Manipuri dance. The Manipuri Raas Leela dance was thereafter ridiculed as immoral, ignorant and old-fashioned, like all other classical Hindu performance arts. The dance and artists survived only in temples, such as in Imphal's Shree Govindajee Temple. The cultural discrimination was resisted and the dance revived by Indian independence movement activists and scholars.
The classical Manipuri Raas Leela dance genre got a second life through the efforts of the Noble Laureate Rabindranath Tagore. In 1919, he was impressed after seeing a dance composition of Goshtha Lila in Sylhet (in present-day Bangladesh). He invited Guru Budhimantra Singh who had trained in Manipuri Raas Leela dance, as faculty to the Indian culture and studies center named Shantiniketan. In 1926, Guru Naba Kumar joined the faculty to teach the Raas Leela. Other celebrated Gurus, Senarik Singh Rajkumar, Nileshwar Mukherji and Atomba Singh were also invited to teach there and assisted Tagore with the choreography of several of his dance-dramas.
The Manipuri classical dance form, which is a masterpiece of Meitei Hindu king Ching Thang Khomba (Meitei for 'Rajarshi Bhagyachandra') of the historical Kingdom of Manipur, is regarded as the highest spiritual expression of the worship of Hindu deity Krishna.
Native to the Meitei civilization of Manipur, India, having significant cultural influences on the different civilizations across the Indian subcontinent, the Manipuri classical dance is recognised by the Sangeet Natak Akademi of the Ministry of Culture of the Government of India as one of the few primary classical dance forms of the Republic of India. At the same time, it is annually honoured with the Sangeet Natak Akademi Award for Manipuri.
According to Banglapedia, the national encyclopedia of Bangladesh, the importance of Manipuri classical dance in Meitei civilization is described as follows:
“Dance and music play a vital role in the life span of Manipuri people. The most flourishing branch of Manipuri culture is dance. The Manipuri synonym of dance is jagoi and in this dance, body movements create either circle or ellipse. Rasa dance is the finest product of Manipuri culture. Maharaj Bhagyachandra innovated it and it was first performed in Manipur in 1779 in the fullmoon of Kartik.”
Chali or Chari is the basic dance movement in Manipuri Raas dances. The repertoire and underlying play depends on the season. The dances are celebrated on full moon nights, three times in autumn (August through November) and once again in spring (March or April). The Basanta Raas is timed with the Hindu festival of colors called Holi, while others are timed with post-harvest festivals of Diwali and others. The plays and songs recited during the dance performance center around the love and frolics between Radha and Krishna, in the presence of Gopis named Lalita, Vishakha, Chitra, Champaklata, Tungavidya, Indurekha, Rangadevi and Sudevi. There is a composition and dance sequence for each Gopi, and the words have two layers of meanings, one literal and other spiritual. The longest piece of the play focusses on Radha and Krishna. The dancer playing Krishna expresses emotions, while the body language and hand gestures of the Gopi display their feelings such as longing, dejection or cheer.
The rhythmic depiction form of abhinaya[acting] is to show the ashtanayika [eight shades of a heroine] in every nayika, which are colored by the scenes of the season in which the ""abhisarika"" expresses her love for Krishna; so that a kuaasha abhisarika who dances in the foggy winter is very different to the varsha abhisarika who faces the thunderous downpouring rain.
In other plays, the Manipuri dancers are more forceful, acrobatic and their costumes adjust to the need of the dance. Dozens of boys synchronously dance the Gopa Ras, where they enact the chores of daily life such as feeding the cows. In Uddhata Akanba, states Ragini Devi, the dance is full of vigor (jumps, squats, spins), energy and elegance.
The classical Manipuri dance features unique costumes. The women characters are dressed, in doll-like Potloi costumes. The brilliant design of the Potloi was conceived in a dream by Vaishnavite Meitei King Rajarshi Bhagyachandra, in which he saw his daughter dancing in a Potloi. The Potloi costumes for women are tailored such that it is avoids arousal of any unhealthy stimulus in the audience.
Kumin is an elaborately decorated barrel shaped long skirt stiffened at the bottom and close to the top. The decorations on the barrel include gold and silver embroidery, small pieces of mirrors, and border prints of lotus, Kwaklei orchid, and other items in nature.
The dancers do not wear bells on ankles but do wear anklets and foot ornaments. Manipuri dance artists wear kolu necklaces on the neck and adorn the face, back, waist, hands and legs with round jewellery ornaments or flower garlands that flow with the dress symmetry. The face is decorated with the sacred Gaudiya Vaishnava Tilak on the forehead and Gopi dots made of sandalwood above the eyebrows. The symmetrical translucent dress, states Reginald Massey, makes ""the dancers appear to float on the stage, as if from another world"".
Koknam (gauze oveerhead, embossed with silver zari), Koktombi (cap covering the head) and Meikhumbi (a transparent thin veil) thrown over the head to symbolically mark elusiveness.
Men wear Leittreng (Kajenglei) (golden headdress around the head) and Chura (made of peacock feathers, wired on top of the head).
The male characters dress in a dhoti (also called dhotra or dhora) – a brilliantly colored broadcloth pleated, wrapped and tied at waist and allowing complete freedom of movement for the legs. Dancers wear a bright yellow-orange dhoti while playing Krishna and a green/blue dhoti while playing Balaram. A crown decorated with peacock feather adorns the dancer's head, who portrays Krishna.
The Pung Cholom dancers wear white dhoti that covers the lower part of body from waist and a snow-white turban on the head. A shawl neatly folded adorns their left shoulders while the drum strap falls on their right shoulders.
The costume tradition of the Manipuri dance celebrates its more ancient artistic local traditions, fused with the spiritual themes of prema bhava of Radha-Krishna found in the tenth book of the Bhagavata Purana.
The Huyen langlon dancers, however, typically wear costumes of Manipuri warriors. The costume varies depending on their gender.
The musical accompaniment for Manipuri dance comes from a percussion instrument called the Pung (a barrel drum), a singer, small kartals (cymbals), sembong, harmonium, and wind instrument such as a flute.
The drummers are male artistes and, after learning to play the pung, students train to dance with it while drumming. This dance is celebrated, states Massey, with the dancer wearing white turbans, white dhotis (for Hindu dummers) or kurtas (for Muslim dummers), a folded shawl over the left shoulder, and the drum strap worn over the right shoulder. It is known as Pung cholom, and the dancer plays the drum and performs the dance jumps and other movements.
Another dance called Kartal cholom, is similar to Pung cholom, but the dancers carry and dance to the rhythm created with cymbals. This is a group dance, where dancers form a circle, move in the same direction while making music and dancing to the rhythm. Women dance too as groups, such as in the Manipuri dance called Mandilla cholom, and these usually go with devotional songs and playing colorful tassels-string tied cymbals where one side represents Krishna and the other Radha. Shaiva (tandava) dances are choreographed as Duff cholom and Dhol cholom.
The songs in Huyen langlon can be played with any Meitei instruments such as the pena and are usually aggressive sounding but they contain no lyrics.
The traditional Manipuri Raas Lila is performed in three styles – Tal Rasak, Danda Rasak and Mandal Rasak. A Tal Rasak is accompanied with clapping, while Danda Rasak is performed by synchronous beat of two sticks but the dancers position it differently to create geometric patterns. The Gopis dance in a circle around the Krishna character in the center.
The Manipuri dance comes in two categories -  tandav (vigorous dance for the dancer who plays Krishna) and lasya (delicate  dance for the dancers who play Radha and Gopis).
The Manipuri Raas Leela dance style embodies dreamy wavelike movements  where one movement dissolves into another like the waves of an ocean. The dance features rounded soft movements of women, and occasional fast movements by male characters. Unlike the other classical dance forms of India, the Manipuri dance artists do not wear anklet bells and the footwork is subdued and gentle in the Manipuri style. The stage movements is part of a composite movement of the whole body.
There are five types of accepted Ras Leela, they are Maharas, Basantaras, Kunjaras, Nityaras and Dibaras.
The Maharas Leela is the most prominent. This dance is performed in the month of Kartik (around November) on a full moon night. It is a story of the Gopis sorrow after the disappearance of Krishna. After seeing the Gopis disheartened, Krishna then reappears and multiplies himself so that he is dancing with each Gopi.
The Basantaras is celebrated on Chaitra (around April) on a full moon night welcoming the spring season. During this time Holi is also celebrated where participants throw colored water or powder at each other. The story of Basantaras is based on Jaidev's Gita Govinda and the Brahma Vavairta Purana.
Kunjaras is celebrated on Ashwin (October) in Autumn on a full moon night.
Nityaras is celebrated any night of the year except for the previous three raas (Maharas, Basantaras and Kunjaras). The story is of the divine union of Radha and Krishna after Radha surrenders herself to Krishna.
Dibaras is celebrated any time of the year during the day besides the periods of Maharas, Basantaras and Kunjaras. The performance comes from the chapters in the Shri Krishnaras- Sangeet Samgraha, Govinda Leelamritya, Shrimad Bhagavata and Sangitamahava.
Manipuri classical dance is illustrated in a postage stamp issued by Armenia in 2018, where it is referred to as the ""National Dances"" (of India and Armenia respectively), along with the Armenian Hov Arek, in the Armenia-India joint issue of postage stamps.
The Manipuri classical dance is recognised as well as honoured in numerous international platforms, including but not limited to the International Classical Manipuri Dance Festival, the International Dance Day, the International Dance Festival-Silicon Valley, the Samarpan, an international classical Manipuri dance festival, the International Indian Classical Dance festival (INDICLAD), the International Folk-Lore Festival, the Opening Ceremony of Asian Games, Seoul, 1986 as well as the 5th International Theatre Festival, London, 1989.
Kathak (Devanagari: कथक) is one of the eight major forms of Indian classical dance. Its origin is attributed to the traveling bards in ancient northern India known as Kathakar (""storyteller""), who communicated stories from the Hindu epics and mythology through dance, songs and music. Its name derives from the Sanskrit word katha which means ""story"", and kathakar which means ""the one who tells a story"", or ""to do with stories"".
Kathak dancers tell various stories utilizing hand movements and extensive footwork, their body movements and flexibility as well as their facial expressions. Kathak often has a strong beat and can be danced in many taals. While proto-Kathak elements can be seen long before, Kathak evolved during the Bhakti movement, particularly by incorporating the childhood and stories of the Hindu god Krishna, as well as independently in the courts of north Indian kingdoms. During the period of Mughal rule, the emperors were patrons of Kathak dance and actively promoted it in their royal courts. Kathak performances include Urdu ghazal and commonly used instruments brought during the Mughal period. As a result, it is the only Indian classical dance form to feature Persian elements.
Kathak is found in four distinct forms, called ""gharana"", named after the cities where the Kathak dance tradition evolved – Jaipur, Benares and Lucknow. While the Jaipur gharana focuses more on the foot movements, the Banaras and Lucknow gharana focus more on facial expressions and graceful hand movements. Stylistically, the Kathak dance form emphasizes rhythmic foot movements, adorned with small bells (Ghungroo) and the movement harmonized to the music. The legs and torso are generally straight, and the story is told through a developed vocabulary based on the gestures of arms and upper body movement, facial expressions, neck movements, eyes and eyebrow movement, stage movements, bends and turns. The main focus of the dance becomes the eyes and the foot movements. The eyes work as a medium of communication of the story the dancer is trying to communicate. With the eyebrows the dancer gives various facial expressions. The difference between the sub-traditions is the relative emphasis between acting versus footwork, with Lucknow style emphasizing acting and Jaipur style famed for its spectacular footwork.
Kathak is a performance art that has survived and thrived as an oral tradition, innovated and taught from one generation to another verbally and through practice. It transitioned, adapted, and integrated the tastes of the Mughal courts in the 16th and 17th centuries, particularly by Akbar, but stagnated and went into decline during the British colonial era, then was reborn as India gained independence and sought to rediscover its ancient roots and a sense of national identity through the arts.
The term Kathak is rooted in the Vedic term Katha (Sanskrit: कथा) which means ""story, conversation, traditional tale"". Kathak refers to one of the major classical dance forms primarily found in northern India, with a historical influence similar to Bharatanatyam in south India, Odissi in east India and other major classical dances found in South Asia. It differs from the numerous folk dance forms found in the north and other parts of the Indian subcontinent.
The Kathak dancers, in the ancient India, were traveling bards and were known as Kathakas, or Kathakar.
Kathak has inspired simplified regional variants, such as the Bhavai – a form of rural theatre focussing on the tales of Hindu goddesses (Shakti), and one which emerged in the medieval era, is presently found in Gujarat, Rajasthan and Madhya Pradesh. Another variant that emerged from ancient Kathak is Thumri.
Thumri was developed by the tawaif community who were called ""nautch"" dancers by the British.  Their history as Kathak dancers have been erased in modern India Pallabi Chakravorty. (2008).""Bells Of Change: Kathak Dance, Women And Modernity In India"", also see ""The Tawaif And The Item Girl: A Struggle For Identity"" 
Performance arts and culture
Let Nātya (drama and dance) be the fifth vedic scripture.
Combined with an epic story, 
tending to virtue, wealth, joy and spiritual freedom, 
it must contain the significance of every scripture 
and forward every art.
According to Mary Snodgrass, the Kathak tradition of India is traceable to 400 BCE. The earliest surviving text with Kathak roots is the Natya Shastra, attributed to sage Bharata. Its first complete compilation is dated to between 200 BCE and 200 CE, but estimates vary between 500 BCE and 500 CE.
The most studied version of the Natya Shastra text consists of about 6000 verses structured into 36 chapters. The text, states Natalia Lidova, describes the theory of Tāṇḍava dance (Shiva), the theory of rasa, of bhāva, expression, gestures, acting techniques, basic steps, standing postures – all of which are part of Indian classical dances including Kathak. Dance and performance arts, states this ancient Hindu text, are a form of expression of spiritual ideas, virtues and the essence of scriptures.
The 2nd century BC panels found in Bharhut show the dancers in a vertical stance with their arms' positions already suggesting today's Kathak movements. Most of the dancers have one arm near the ear in a ''pataka hasta'' (Mudra). In subsequent years, the hasta was lowered to the bust level.
The term Kathakas in the sense of ""storytellers"" appears in ancient Hindu texts, such as the Mahabharata:
वेदवेदाङ्गविद्वांसस्तथैवाध्यात्मचिन्तकाः |
चौक्षाश्च भगवद्भक्ताः सूताः पौराणिकाश्च ये ||२||
कथकाश्चापरे राजञ्श्रमणाश्च वनौकसः |
दिव्याख्यानानि ये चापि पठन्ति मधुरं द्विजाः ||३||

Followed by the scholars of the Vedas and Vedangas, and by those who ponder on their soul,
by persons skilled in music, by the devotees of Bhagavata, (...)
by Kathakas (reciters of the sacred lore), by dwellers of forests, (...) 
by those who sweetly recite celestial histories.
Bards, actors, dancers, songsters and musical reciters of legends and stories are mentioned hundreds of times in the Hindu Epics.
Textual studies suggest that ""Kathak"" as a classical dance form likely started in Banares (Varanasi) and from there migrated northwest to Lucknow, Jaipur and other parts of north and northwest India. The Lucknow tradition of Kathak dance attributes the style to a Bhakti movement devotee named Ishwari from the Handia village in Allahabad, Uttar Pradesh, who credited Hindu God Krishna appearing in his dream and asking him to develop ""dance as a form of worship"". Ishwari taught his descendants, who in turn preserved the learning and developments through an oral tradition over six generations ultimately yielding the Lucknow version of the Kathak dance – a family tree that is acknowledged in both Hindu and Muslim music-related Indian literature.
The evolution in Kathak dance theme during the Bhakti movement centered primarily around divine Krishna, his lover Radha and milkmaids (gopis) – around legends and texts such as the Bhagavata Purana found in the Vaishnavism tradition of Hinduism. The love between Radha and Krishna became symbolism for the love between Atman (soul within) and the supreme source (Cosmic soul everywhere), a theme that dance ballet and mimetic plays of Kathak artists expressed. Although central Asian influence of Kathak rapid whirls has been proposed, Sangitaratnakara, a 13th-century Sanskrit text on Indian classical music and dance in Chapter 4 mentions a dance movement with rapid whirling around like a wheel keeping the arms in the Dola pose and bending the body inwards called 'Cakramandala' It is employed in worshipping gods and in vigorous movement.
The emergence of Raslila, mainly in the Braj region (Mathura in Western U.P.) was an important development. It combined in itself music, dance, and the narrative. Dance in Raslila, however, was mainly an extension of the basic mime and gestures of the Kathakars or story-tellers which blended easily with the existing traditional dance.
With the coming of the Mughals, this dance form received a new impetus. A transition from the temple courtyard to the palace durbar took place which necessitated changes in presentation. In both Hindu and Muslim courts, Kathak became highly stylized and came to be regarded as a sophisticated form of entertainment. Under the Muslims, there was a greater stress on nritya and bhavag - the dance's graceful, expressive and sensuous dimensions.
The Mughal era courts and nobles accepted Kathak as a form of aristocratic entertainment, which low income families were willing to provide.  According to Drid Williams:
It should be remembered that the first Kathak dancers were, after all, Hindus who danced for Moghul overlords. Too much outward expression of religious belief was without doubt undesirable. It is therefore reasonable to assume that the wide use of 'abstract' dancing, intricate bell work (tatkar), dazzling turns and the fleeting, transient, glimpses of Radha and Krishna in Kathak arose both to remind the dancers about their reasons for dancing and (gently, unobtrusively) to deceive their courtly Moghul audiences. Perhaps tatkar and tukras formed the bulk of these first dancers' performances. Gradually more and more images, then stories of Krishna and Radha crept in.
Over time, the Kathak repertoire added Persian and Central Asian themes, such as the whirling of Sufi dance, the dress replaced sari with items that bared midriff and included a transparent veil of the type common with medieval Harem dancers. When the colonial European officials began arriving in India, the Kathak court entertainment they witnessed was a synthesis of the ancient Indian tradition and Central Asian-Persian dance form, and the Kathak dance performers were called the ""nautch girls"" (or natch, a derivative of the more difficult to pronounce Sanskrit natya).
With the expansion of British colonial rule in 19th-century India, Kathak along with all other classical dance forms were discouraged and it went into decline. This was in part the result of the Victorian morality of sexual repressiveness along with Anglican missionaries who criticized Hinduism. Reverend James Long, for example, proposed that Kathak dancers should forget ancient Indian tales and Hindu legends, and substitute them with European legends and Christian tales. Missionaries recorded their frustration in Church Missionary Review when they saw Hindu audiences applaud and shout ""Ram, Ram"" during Kathak performances.
The seductive gestures and facial expressions during Kathak performances in Temples and family occasions were caricatured in The Wrongs of Indian Womanhood, published at the start of the 20th century, as evidence of ""harlots, debased erotic culture, slavery to idols and priests"" tradition, and Christian missionaries demanded that this must be stopped, launching the ""anti-dance movement"" or ""anti-nautch movement"" in 1892. Officials and newspapers dehumanized the Kathak dancers and the sources of patronage were pressured to stop supporting the Kathak performing ""nautch girls"" (also termed as devadasis and tawa'ifs in mid 20th century literature). Many accused the dance form as a front for prostitution, while revivalists questioned the constructed histories by the colonial writers.
Not only did missionaries and colonial officials ridicule the Kathak dancers, Indian men who had been educated in British institution and had adapted to Victorian prudery joined the criticism, states Margaret Walker, possibly because they had lost their cultural connection, no longer understood the underlying spiritual themes behind the dance, and assumed this was one of the ""social ills, immoral and backward elements"" in their heritage that they must stamp out. However, the Hindu families continued their private tutoring and kept the Kathak art alive as an oral tradition. Kathak teachers also shifted to training boys to preserve the tradition, as most of the 20th-century ridicule had been directed at Kathak ""nautch girls"".
Kathak was brought to the attention of audiences outside India in the early 20th century through Kalkaprasad Maharaj.
The movement to end the colonial era and for an independent India, states Walker, also witnessed a revival of Kathak and more broadly, a cultural ferment and effort to reclaim culture and rediscover history.
The Kathak revival movements co-developed in Hindu gharanas, particularly by the Kathak-Misra community. Of these the Jaipur and Lucknow sub-traditions of Kathak have attracted more scholarship.
The oldest Kathak department pat a degree college (university) was formed in 1956 at Indira Kala Sangeet University, a public university located in Khairagarh where Puru Dadheech instated the first Kathak syllabus for degree programs.  It was inspired by the diploma syllabus of Mohanrao Kallianpurkar at Bhatkhande College.
According to a BBC Arts article, Kathak is unique in being practiced by the Muslim community of the India, and thus has a ""historical link to Islam."" Farah Yasmeen Shaikh, a Muslim and a disciple of Pandit Chitresh Das in the Lucknow school, considers Kathak as a ""confluence of Hindu and Muslim cultures"", and has presented her performance in Pakistan. In contrast, states BBC, Nahid Siddiqui (a legendary Kathak dancer from Pakistan, settled and nurtured in the UK), has a hard time practising and presenting her [Kathak] art in her birth-country of Pakistan"".
While most scholars consider Kathak as an ancient art, some such as Margaret Walker suggest the modern Kathak is a 20th-century phenomenon, more a form of cultural revival, if one relies on the music-related Indian documents.
A modern Kathak, in all three major sub-traditions called Lucknow, Benares and Jaipur styles (gharana), states Bruno Nettl, consist of three main sections - the invocation, one pure (abstract) dance recital and one expressive dance.
The invocation (vandana) consists of the dancer coming to stage and offering respect to his or her guru and the musicians on the stage. If the team is from the Hindu tradition, the dancer(s) combine facial expressions and hand gestures (mudra) to invoke Hindu gods and goddesses; while a Muslim performance replace the devotional expressions with a salami (salutation).
The pure dance is called a nritta, while the expressive dance is called a nritya. A Kathak performance can be solo, duo or team. In a technical performance, the speed and energy the dancers exchange with the audience increases in multiples, that is the tempo doubles or quadruples. During the performance, one or more of the Kathak artists may come to the microphone, interact with the audience, explain something, tell an anecdote in a particular language, or rhythmically recite a song.
The dresses of the dancer and the facial cosmetics between a Hindu or Muslim Kathak dance troupe varies. The stage typically is bare with no distracting background, states Williams, with musicians seated on rugs downstage right (audience's left), and if it is a Hindu performance there is an image of dancing Shiva (Nataraja) or a Ganesha on the stage's left with flowers and perfumed incense burning.[note 2]
The nritta  performance starts off with a thàth sequence, which is a slower graceful movement of wrists, neck and eyebrows. Thereafter, the dancer gradually increases speed and energy, while completing a sequence of bol (mnemonic syllables in Indian tradition). Each bol has short sections, similar to technical exercises in western dance traditions, wherein the dancer engages the audience with tora, tukra, parhant, paran and others stressing footwork, gestures and turns. Each section when completed has a punctuation mark, usually a sharp turn of the head. Each ankle is adorned with small bells (ghungroo), which may have just one bell or hundreds. The dancer's rapid movements and footwork in a nritta is perfectly timed to the musical beats (tala) and tempos, and the footwork sequences are called tatkars.
Most of the Nritta performance is abstract, fast and rhythmic aspect of Kathak. In a Kathak nritta, as with all classical Indian  dance forms, the viewer is presented with pure movement, wherein the emphasis is the beauty in motion, form, speed, range and pattern. It aims to engage the senses (prakriti) of the audience.
Nritya is slower and expressive aspect of Kathak that attempts to communicate feelings, storyline particularly with spiritual themes in Hindu dance traditions. In a nritya, the dance expands to include words, musical notes and gestures to articulate a legend or message, it is more than sensory enjoyment, it aims to engage the emotions and mind of the viewer.
The expressiveness of Kathak is also found in other classical dances of India. Its roots are found in the Natyashastra text which defines drama in verse 6.10 as that which aesthetically arouses joy in the spectator, through the medium of actor's art of communication, that helps connect and transport the individual into a super sensual inner state of being. The Natya connects through abhinaya (literally, ""carrying to the spectators""), that is applying body-speech-mind and scene, wherein asserts Natyashastra, the actors communicate to the audience, through song and music. Drama in this ancient Sanskrit text, thus is an art to engage every aspect of life, in order to glorify and gift a state of joyful consciousness. According to Massey, another important ancient text that has influenced Kathak is the Abhinaya Darpanam of Nandikeshvara (~2nd century CE).
In Kathak, abhinaya is in the form of expressive gestures and pantomime set to music that usually outline a legend or the plot of a well known story. The gestures and facial expressions convey the ras (sentiment, emotional taste) and bhava (mood) of the underlying story. In the Hindu texts on dance, the guru and the artists successfully express the spiritual ideas by paying attention to four aspects of a performance: Angik (gestures and body language), Vachik (song, recitation, music and rhythm), Aharya (dress, make-up, jewelry), and Satvik (artist's mental disposition and emotional connection with the story and audience, wherein the artist's inner and outer state resonates). A Kathak nritya performance, however grants flexibility to the artists and invites improvisation, and it may not be accompanied with a song or recital about the legend. The stories in Kathak performance generally tend to be about the Hindu god Krishna (or in some cases Shiva or Devi), and the stories come from sources such as the Bhagavata Purana, or the Indian Epics. This form of expressiveness is also found in thumri and Persian ghazals.
The dresses vary among Kathak performers, and find their sources in either Hindu or Muslim culture.
The Hindu dress for female dancers has two variations.One is based on a Sari, but is worn in a style different from the customary style that goes over the left shoulder. A Kathak artist generally wraps the sari around the waist and it hangs down from the left. A blouse called choli covers the upper body. The artist may wear a scarf (called orhni in some places). Hair, face, ear, neck, hand, wrist and ankle jewellery, typically of gold, may adorn the artist. A tika or bindi in the middle of forehead is common.  The second variation of a Hindu Kathak dancer uses a long, full (just above the ankle), light-weight skirt usually with embroidered border that helps highlight the dance motion. The skirt is contrasted with a different color choli, and a transparent scarf typically drapes over it and the dancer's head. Jewelry is typically present in the second variation.
The Muslim dress for female dancers also uses a skirt, but includes close fitting churidar pyjamas and sometimes a long coat covering hands and the upper body. The head has a cover scarf and the jewelry is light.
The Hindu dress for male Kathak performers is typically a silk dhoti draped around the waist, and covered with a silk scarf tied over the top. The upper body is usually left bare or with only the Hindu thread, but is sometimes covered with a loose sleeveless jacket. Kathak male artists also wear jewelry, but often of stones and much simpler than the female artists.
The Mughal dress for male Kathak performers is kurta-churidar. The kurta can be a simple one, or cut as an angarkha.  There is also the possibility of adapting the angarkha or kurta for dance to incorporate wider flare in the lower portion. Particularly older variety dress include the small peaked cap too.[citation needed]
The ensemble of musical instruments vary with any Kathak performer, ranging from two to twelve  classical Indian instruments or more in versions with synthetic innovations. The most common instruments that go with Kathak are tabla (a pair of hand drums) that syncs with the dancer's feet rhythms, sarangi or harmonium with manjira (hand cymbals) that meters the tal (cycle), and other instruments to add effect, depth and structure to the expressive stage of a Kathak performance.
The ancient music genre of India, Dhrupad, was re-introduced into Kathak for the first time by India's senior Kathak exponent Mahamahopadhyay Dr. Pandit Puru Dadheech.  He is India's first Kathak dancer to bring back 'Dhrupad' on the formal Kathak stage and this composition in 28 matra. Shankar Pralayankar, his Dhrupad composition, has the unique status of regularly being sung in concerts by 'Dhrupad' maestros the Gundecha Brothers.
Kathak is a diffuse tradition, of which three gharanas (schools) are more well known and studied – Jaipur, Benares and Lucknow. The schools place different relative emphasis between aspects of a Kathak performance such as the acting versus footwork. The Lucknow style, for example, emphasizes acting while Jaipur style emphasizes the dance and footwork. Traditionally, the Jaipur gharana has had a strong spiritual flavor, covering a diverse range of ideas in Vaishnavism and Shaivism.
The Jaipur gharana traces its origins to Bhanuji, a famed Shiva Tandava dancer who upon visiting Vrindavan was inspired and taught Natvari Nritya. Bhanuji's grandons Laluji and Kanhuji were similarly inspired by Krishna. They returned to Jaipur, and together they began the Jaipur gharana of Kathak. The Jaipur style developed under the sponsorship of Rajput rulers, and they favored the Kathak dance with Hindu religious themes. In the modern era, this school has continued their emphasis on dance and footwork with Jai Lal, Janki Prasad, Kundan Lal, Mohan Lal and Nawal Kishore. This school is best known for its systematic innovations in rhythmic dancing, and the use of dance movement to express a story. 
The Lucknow gharana of Kathak dance attributes its origins to a rural Krishna devotee named Ishwari from the village in southeast Uttar Pradesh, who aimed to develop Kathak dance as a form of loving devotion to Krishna. This school thrived after the Mughal Empire collapsed, when Kathak artists moved from Delhi to Lucknow under the sponsorship of Avadh nawabs who favored court dance culture. In the modern era, the Lucknow gharana style influences the dance school in New Delhi with Shambu Maharaj, Birju Maharaj and Lacchu Maharaj. Kathak choreography there has developed themes beyond Krishna-Radha, such as those based on the drama works of Kalidasa's Shiva-Parvati and Bhavabhuti's Malati-Madhav. This school has also attempted a Hindu-Muslim Kathak fusion style, highlighting the court dancers theme.
The Benares gharana is the third major style, traditionally believed to be the oldest. Its history is unclear. According to Kothari, the school started with Janakiprasad from a village near Bikaner who resettled in Varanasi, but one whose ancestors were famed dancers and musicians. Janakiprasad was a dancer and a Sanskrit scholar, and credited with inventing the bols of Kathak, which are mnemonic syllables within the language of this classical dance of India.
According to Nicole Lehmann, modern Kathak dancers show, to varying degrees, a fusion of the styles from all three gharanas.
The north Indian Kathak dance differs from the south Indian Bharatanatyam in several ways, even though both have roots in the Hindu text Natya Shastra. Kathak expressions – particularly in Hindu devotional styles – are more introverted and withdrawn, while Bharatanatyam is more extroverted and expansive. Kathak is normally performed in a standing form with legs and torso typically straight, while Bharatanatyam extensively utilizes bent knee form (ara mandi, half sitting position that is somewhat similar to Demi Plié ballet move).
Kathak is also different from Kathakali, though both are Indian classical dance traditions of ""story play"" wherein the stories have been traditionally derived from the Hindu epics and the Puranas. Kathakali emerged in the southwestern region of India (modern Kerala), and is distinctive in its elaborate codified colorful makeup, masks and dress. Kathakali traditionally has been troupes of predominantly male actor-dancers, who dress up as hero, heroines, gods, goddesses, demons, demonesses, priests, animals and daily life characters. Both dance forms employ elaborate footwork, choreography and hand gestures, but Kathakali integrates south Indian martial arts movements such as leaps and jumps. Both dance forms trace their roots to classical Sanskrit texts, but Kathakali has relatively more recent origins, more closely follows the Hastha Lakshanadeepika text and began flourishing in the 16th century. While each has a different musical and dance language, both deploy a host of similar traditional Indian musical instruments.
According to Miriam Phillips, the Indian Kathak and the Spanish Flamenco dance share many visual, rhythmic and kinesthetic similarities.
Dance in India comprises numerous styles of dances, generally classified as classical or folk. As with other aspects of Indian culture, different forms of dances originated in different parts of India, developed according to the local traditions and also imbibed elements from other parts of the country.
Sangeet Natya Academy, the national academy for performing arts in India, recognizes eight traditional dances as Indian classical dances, while other sources and scholars recognize more. These have roots in the Sanskrit text Natya Shastra, and the religious performance arts of Hinduism.
Folk dances are numerous in number and style and vary according to the local tradition of the respective state, ethnic, or geographic region. Contemporary dances include refined and experimental fusions of classical, folk, and Western forms. Dancing traditions of India have influence not only over the dances in the whole of South Asia, but on the dancing forms of Southeast Asia as well. Dances in Indian films, like Bollywood Dance for Hindi films, are often noted for freeform expression of dance and hold a significant presence in the popular culture of the Indian subcontinent.
In India, a command over either of Sanskrit, Tamil, Telugu, Oriya, Meitei (Manipuri), Persian, or Arabic, are highly appreciated and respected for learning dances (most significantly Indian Classical Dances) as dancers could have the tools of these languages to go into the primary material texts.
Classical dance is one whose theory, training, means and rationale for expressive practice is documented and traceable to ancient classical texts, particularly the Natya Shastra. Classical Indian dances have historically involved a school or guru-shishya parampara (teacher-disciple tradition) and require studies of the classical texts, physical exercises, and extensive training to systematically synchronize the dance repertoire with underlying play or composition, vocalists and the orchestra.
A folk Indian dance is one which is largely an oral tradition, whose traditions have been historically learnt and mostly passed down from one generation to the next through word of mouth and casual joint practice. A semi-classical Indian dance is one that contains a classical imprint but has become a folk dance and lost its texts or schools. A tribal dance is a more local form of folk dance, typically found in one tribal population; typically tribal dances evolve into folk dances over a historic period.
The origins of dance in India go back to ancient times. The earliest paleolithic and neolithic cave paintings such as the UNESCO world heritage site at Bhimbetka rock shelters in Madhya Pradesh show dance scenes. Several sculptures found at Indus Valley Civilisation archaeological sites, now distributed between Pakistan and India, show dance figures. For example, the Dancing Girl sculpture is dated to about 2500 BCE, showing a 10.5 centimetres (4.1 in) high figurine in a dance pose.
The Vedas integrate rituals with performance arts, such as a dramatic play, where not only praises to gods were recited or sung, but the dialogues were part of a dramatic representation and discussion of spiritual themes. The Sanskrit verses in chapter 13.2 of Shatapatha Brahmana (≈800–700 BCE), for example, are written in the form of a play between two actors.
The Vedic sacrifice (yajna) is presented as a kind of fight, with its actors, its dialogues, its portion to be set to music, its interludes, and its climaxes.
The evidence of earliest dance-related texts are in Natasutras, which are mentioned in the text of Panini, the sage who wrote the classic on Sanskrit grammar, and who is dated to about 500 BCE. This performance arts related Sutra text is mentioned in other late Vedic texts, are as two scholars names Shilalin (IAST: Śilālin) and Krishashva (Kṛśaśva), credited to be pioneers in the studies of ancient drama, singing, dance and Sanskrit compositions for these arts. Richmond et al. estimate the Natasutras to have been composed around 600 BCE, whose complete manuscript has not survived into the modern age.
The classic text of dance and performance arts that has survived is the Hindu text Natya Shastra, attributed to sage Bharata. He credits the art his text systematically presents to times before him, ultimately to Brahma who created Natya-veda by taking the word from the Rigveda, melody from the Samaveda, mime from the Yajurveda, and emotion from the Atharvaveda. The first complete compilation of Natya Shastra is dated to between 200 BCE and 200 CE, but estimates vary between 500 BCE and 500 CE. The most studied version of the Natya Shastra text consists of about 6000 verses structured into 36 chapters. The classical dances are rooted in Natya Shastra.
India has a number of classical Indian dance forms, each of which can be traced to different parts of the country.  Classical and folk dance forms also emerged from Indian traditions, epics and mythology.
Classical dance of India has developed a type of dance-drama that is a form of total theater. The dancer acts out a story almost exclusively through gestures. Most of the classical dances of India enact stories from Hindu mythology. Each form represents the culture and ethos of a particular region or a group of people.
The criteria for being considered as classical is the style's adherence to the guidelines laid down in Natyashastra, which explains the Indian art of acting. The Sangeet Natak Akademi currently confers classical status on eight Indian classical dance styles: Bharatanatyam (Tamil Nadu), Kathak (North, West and Central India), Kathakali (Kerala), Kuchipudi (Andhra), Odissi (Odisha), Manipuri (Manipur), Mohiniyattam (Kerala), and Sattriya (Assam). All classical dances of India have roots in Hindu arts and religious practices.
The classical dance of India is also common outside it, for example, it was performed on the island of Ouahu by their mayor  (Proshakov E.D.) as part of the local folklore festival.
The tradition of dance has been codified in the Natyashastra and performance is considered accomplished if it manages to evoke a rasa (emotion) among the audience by invoking a particular bhava(gesture or facial expression). Classical dance is distinguished from folk dance because it has been regulated by the rules of the Natyashastra and all classical dances are performed only in accordance with them.
Dating back to 1000 BC, bharatanatyam is a classical dance from the South Indian state of Tamil Nadu, practiced predominantly in modern times by women. The dance is usually accompanied by classical Carnatic music. Bharatnatyam is a major genre of the thing Indian classical dance that originated in the Hindu temples of Tamil Nadu and neighboring regions. Traditionally, Bharatanatyam has been a solo dance that was performed exclusively by women, and expressed Hindu religious themes and spiritual ideas, particularly of Shaivism, but also of Vaishnavism and Shaktism.
Bharatanatyam and other classical dances in India were ridiculed and suppressed during the colonial British Raj era. In the post-colonial period, it has grown to become the most popular classical Indian dance style in India and abroad, and is considered to be synonymous with Indian dance by many foreigners unaware of the diversity of dances and performance arts in Indian culture.
Kathakali (katha, ""story""; kali, ""performance"") is a highly stylized classical dance-drama form, which originated from Kerala in the 17th century. This classical dance form is another ""story play"" genre of art, but one distinguished by its elaborately colorful make-up, costumes and face masks wearing actor-dancers, who have traditionally been all males.
Kathakali primarily developed as a Hindu performance art, performing plays and mythical legends related to Hinduism. While its origin are more recent, its roots are in temple and folk arts such as Kutiyattam and religious drama traceable to at least the 1st millennium CE. A Kathakali performance incorporates movements from the ancient martial arts and athletic traditions of south India. While linked to the temple dancing traditions such as Krishnanattam, Kutiyattam and others, Kathakali is different from these because unlike the older arts where the dancer-actor also had to be the vocal artist, Kathakali separated these roles allowing the dancer-actor to excel in and focus on choreography while the vocal artists focused on delivering their lines.
Kathak is traditionally attributed to the traveling bards of ancient northern India, known as Kathakas or storytellers. The term Kathak is derived from the Vedic Sanskrit word Katha meaning ""story"", and kathaka in Sanskrit means ""he who tells a story"", or ""to do with stories"". Kathak evolved during the Bhakti movement, particularly by incorporating childhood and amorous stories of Hindu god Krishna, as well as independently in the courts of north Indian kingdoms. It transitioned, adapted and integrated the tastes and Persian arts influence in the Mughal courts of the 16th and 17th century, was ridiculed and declined in the colonial British era, then was reborn as India gained independence.
Kathak is found in three distinct forms, named after the cities where the Kathak dance tradition evolved – Jaipur, Benares and Lucknow. Stylistically, the Kathak dance form emphasizes rhythmic foot movements, adorned with small bells (Ghungroo), the movement harmonized to the music, the legs and torso are generally straight, and the story is told through a developed vocabulary based on the gestures of arms and upper body movement, facial expressions, stage movements, bends and turns.
Kuchipudi classical dance originated in a village of Krishna district in modern era Indian state of Andhra Pradesh. It has roots in antiquity and developed as a religious art linked to traveling bards, temples and spiritual beliefs, like all major classical dances of India. In its history, the Kuchipudi dancers were all males, typically Brahmins, who would play the roles of men and women in the story after dressing appropriately.
Modern Kuchipudi tradition believes that Tirtha Narayana Yati and his disciple an orphan named Siddhendra Yogi founded and systematized the art in the 17th century. Kuchipudi largely developed as a Hindu god Krishna-oriented Vaishnavism tradition, and it is most closely related to Bhagavata Mela performance art found in Tamil Nadu,  which itself has originated from Andhra Pradesh. The Kuchipudi performance includes pure dance (nritta), and expressive part of the performance (nritya), where rhythmic gestures as a sign language mime the play. Vocalists and musicians accompany the artist, and the tala and raga set to (Carnatic music). In modern productions, Kuchipudi dancers include men and women.
Odissi originated in the Hindu temples of Odisha – an eastern coastal state of India. Odissi, in its history, was performed predominantly by women, and expressed religious stories and spiritual ideas, particularly of Vaishnavism (Vishnu as Jagannath), but also of other traditions such as those related to Hindu gods Shiva and Surya, as well as Hindu goddesses (Shaktism). Odissi is traditionally a dance-drama genre of performance art, where the artist(s) and musicians play out a mythical story, a spiritual message or devotional poem from the Hindu texts, using symbolic costumes, body movement, abhinaya (expressions) and mudras (gestures and sign language) set out in ancient Sanskrit literature.
Sattriya is a classical dance-drama performance art with origins in the Krishna-centered Vaishnavism monasteries of Assam, and attributed to the 15th century Bhakti movement scholar and saint named Srimanta Sankardev. One-act plays of Sattriya are called Ankiya Nat, which combine the aesthetic and the religious through a ballad, dance and drama. The plays are usually performed in the dance community halls (namghar) of monastery temples (sattras). The themes played relate to Krishna and Radha, sometimes other Vishnu avatars such as Rama and Sita.
Manipuri Raas Leela dance is a unique form of dance drama which has its origin in Manipur, a state in northeastern India bordering with Myanmar (Burma). It is particularly known for its Hindu Vaishnavism themes, and performances of love-inspired dance drama of Radha-Krishna called Ras Lila. However, the dance is also performed to themes related to Shaivism, Shaktism. The Manipuri Raas Leela dance is a team performance, with its own unique costumes notably the Kumil (a barrel shaped, elegantly decorated skirt), aesthetics, conventions and repertoire. The Manipuri dance drama is, for most part, marked by a performance that is graceful, fluid, sinuous with greater emphasis on hand and upper body gestures.
Mohiniyattam developed in the state of Kerala, gets its name from Mohini – the seductress avatar of Vishnu, who in Hindu mythology uses her charms to help the good prevail in a battle between good and evil. Mohiniyattam follows the Lasya style described in Natya Shastra, that is a dance which is delicate, with soft movements and feminine. It is traditionally a solo dance performed by women after extensive training. The repertoire of Mohiniyattam includes pure and expressive dance-drama performances, timed to sopana (slower melody) styled music, with recitation. The songs are typically in a Malayalam-Sanskrit hybrid called Manipravala.
Folk dances and plays in India retain significance in rural areas as the expression of the daily work and rituals of village communities.
Sanskrit literature of medieval times describes several forms of group dances such as Hallisaka, Rasaka, Dand Rasaka and Charchari.  The Natya Shastra includes group dances of women as a preliminary dance performed in prelude to a drama.
Tribal Dances in India are inspired by the tribal folklore. Each ethnic group has its own distinct combination of myths, legends, tales, proverbs, riddles, ballads, folk songs, folk dance, and folk music.
The dancers do not necessarily fall rigidly into the category of ""tribal"". However, these forms of dance closely depict their life, social relationships, work, and religious affiliations.  They represent the rich culture and customs of their native lands through intricate movements of their bodies. A wide variation can be observed in the intensity of these dances. Some involve very slight movement with a groovier edge to it, while others involve elevated and vigorous involvement of limbs.
These dances are composed mostly on locally made instruments. Percussion instruments feature in most of these dances. Music is produced through indigenous instruments. Music too has its own diversity in these tribal dances with the aesthetics ranging from mild and soothing to strong and weighted rhythms. A few of them also have songs, either sung by themselves or by onlookers. The costumes vary from traditional saris of a particular pattern to skirts and blouses with mirror work for women and corresponding dhotis and upper-wear for men.  They celebrate contemporary events, and victories and are often performed as a mode of appeasing the tribal deities.
A lot of the dance styles depend upon the regional positioning of the ethnic group. Factors as small as the east or west of a river result in a change of dance form even though the overreaching look of it may seem the same. Religious affiliation affects the content of the songs and hence the actions in a dance sequence. Another major factor affecting their content is the festivals, mostly harvest.
For example, the ethnic groups from the plain land rabhas from the hilly forested areas of Assam make use of baroyat (plate-like instrument), Handa (a type of sword), boushi (adze-like instrument), boumshi (bamboo flute), sum (heavy wooden instrument), dhansi. kalbansi, kalhurang, chingbakak. Traditionally, their dances are called basili. Through their dance, they express their labours, rejoicings and sorrows.  Handur Basu their pseudo-war dance expresses their strength and solidarity.
From a broader point of view, the different tribal dance forms, as they would be classified in the context of territory are:
Mussoll, Dulpod or Durpod, Kunnbi-Geet, Amon, Shigmo, Fugdi, and Dhalo.
Rasleela, Phag Dance, Phalgun, Daph Dance, Dhamaal, Loor, Guga, Jhomar, Ghomar, Khoria, Holi, Sapela.
Pang Toed Chaam (Chaam means dance) performed during the Pang Lhabsol festival in honor of the Guardian deity Khang-Chen-Dzonga, Maruni (Nepali Dance), and Tamak.
Contemporary dance in India encompasses a wide range of dance activities currently performed in India.  It includes choreography for Indian cinema, modern Indian ballet and experiments with existing classical and folk forms of dance by various artists.
Uday Shankar and Shobana Jeyasingh have led modern Indian ballet which combined classical Indian dance and music with Western stage techniques. Their productions have included themes related to Shiva-Parvati, Lanka Dahan, Panchatantra, Ramayana among others.
The presentation of Indian dance styles in film, Hindi Cinema, has exposed the range of dance in India to a global audience.
Dance and song sequences have been an integral component of films across the country. With the introduction of sound to the cinema in the film Alam Ara in 1931, choreographed dance sequences became ubiquitous in Hindi and other Indian films.
Dance in early Hindi films was primarily modeled on classical Indian dance styles such as Kathak, or folk dancers. Modern films often blend this earlier style with Western dance styles (MTV or in Broadway musicals), though it is not unusual to see western choreography and adapted classical dance numbers side by side in the same film. Typically, the hero or heroine performs with a troupe of supporting dancers. Many song-and-dance routines in Indian films feature dramatic shifts of location and/or changes of costume between verses of a song. It is popular for a hero and heroine to dance and sing a pas de deux (a French ballet term, meaning ""dance of two"") in beautiful natural surroundings or architecturally grand settings, referred to as a ""picturisation"".
Indian films have often used what are now called ""item numbers"" where a glamorous female figure performs a cameo. The choreography for such item numbers varies depending on the film's genre and situation. The film actress and dancer Helen was famous for her cabaret numbers.
Often in movies, the actors don't sing the songs themselves that they dance too, themselves but have another artist sing in the background. For an actor to sing in the song is unlikely but not rare. The dances in Bollywood can range from slow dancing to a more upbeat hip-hop style dance. The dancing itself is a fusion of all dance forms. It could be Indian classical, Indian folk dance, belly dancing, jazz, hip-hop, and everything else you can imagine.
Since India's independence from colonial rule, numerous schools have opened to further education, training, and socialization through dance classes, or simply a means to exercise and fitness.
Major cities in India now have numerous schools that offer lessons in dances such as Odissi, Bharatanatyam, and these cities host hundreds of shows every year. Dances which were exclusive to one gender, now have participation by both males and females. Many innovations and developments in the modern practice of classical Indian dances, states Anne-Marie Geston, are of a quasi-religious type.
Some traditions of the Indian classical dance are practiced in the whole Indian subcontinent, including Pakistan and Bangladesh, with which India shares several other cultural traits. Indian mythologies play a significant part in dance forms of countries in Southeast Asia, an example being the performances based on Ramayana in Javanese dances.
Sangeet Natak Akademi (The National Academy of Music, Dance, and Drama) organizes dance festivals around India.
Indian classical dance, or Shastriya Nritya, is an umbrella term for different regionally-specific Indian classical dance traditions, rooted in predominantly Hindu musical theatre performance, the theory and practice of which can be traced to the Sanskrit text Natya Shastra.
The number of Indian classical dance styles ranges from six to eight to twelve, or more, depending on the source and scholar; the main organisation for Indian arts preservation, the Sangeet Natak Academy recognizes eight: Bharatanatyam, Kathak, Kuchipudi, Odissi, Kathakali, Sattriya, Manipuri and Mohiniyattam. Additionally, the Indian Ministry of Culture includes Chhau in its list, recognising nine total styles. Scholars such as Drid Williams add Chhau, Yakshagana and Bhagavata Mela to the list. Each dance tradition originates and comes from a different state and/or region of India; for example, Bharatanatyam is from Tamil Nadu in the south of India, Odissi is from the east coast state of Odisha, and Manipuri is from the northeastern state of Manipur. The music associated with these different dance performances consists many compositions in Hindi, Malayalam, Meitei (Manipuri), Sanskrit, Tamil, Odia, Telugu, and many other Indian-Subcontinent languages; they represent a unity of core ideas, and a diversity of styles, costumes and expression.
Indian classical dancing started around 200 BCE in India, as a joyful and celebratory activity, often in devotion to Hindu deities. Many of the performances are choreographed to retell stories of the gods and other historical accounts. All styles of Indian classical dance are vibrant, expressive and spiritual. Dance performances usually take place at festivals, universities, various cultural events, and more. The dancers who perform these styles are usually professionals who have devoted years of study and practice in their respective style of Indian classical dance. In performances, the dancers move to the beat of the song or music that is playing; in some styles, such as Kathak, bells are worn around the ankles at times for added rhythmic effect when the feet are stomped. The dancer takes the role of the character that they are portraying in the performance, the composition being specific, and become emotionally connected with the story and the audience.
When dancers perform classical Indian dancing they wear traditional clothes including sarees, lenghas, and kurtas. Usually, women are the main performers in Indian classical dancing, though men are not absent from the tradition. The costume for women usually consists of a long, colorful, handmade gown (worn without shoes), with an intricately embroidered pattern(s) and beading on it. For accessories, there is the use of much ornate jewelry, such as necklaces, rings, earrings, nose-rings, bracelets and anklets, sometimes with bells attached which ring each time the dancer stomps their foot in rhythm. The costume also includes a head-piece or some form of scarf, depending on the style. The women usually wear considerable amounts of facial makeup, not only to be noticeable from the audience, but to fully embody their character. 
The Natya Shastra is the foundational treatise for classical dances of India, and this text is attributed to the ancient scholar Bharata Muni. Its first complete compilation is dated to between 200 BCE and 200 CE, but estimates vary between 500 BCE and 500 CE. The most studied version of the Natya Shastra text consists of about 6000 verses structured into 36 chapters. The text, states Natalia Lidova, describes the theory of Tāṇḍava dance (Shiva), the theory of rasa, of bhāva, expression, gestures, acting techniques, basic steps, standing postures – all of which are part of Indian classical dances. Dance and performance arts, states this ancient text, are a form of expression of spiritual ideas, virtues and the essence of scriptures.
Performance arts and culture
Let Nātya (drama and dance) be the fifth vedic scripture.
Combined with an epic story,
tending to virtue, wealth, joy and spiritual freedom,
it must contain the significance of every scripture,
and forward every art.
While the Natya Shastra is the revered ancient text in the Hindu tradition, there are numerous other ancient and medieval Sanskrit dance-drama related texts that further discuss and expand on the classical repertoire of performance arts, such as the Abhinaya Darpana, Abhinava Bharati, Natya Darpana, Bhava Prakasa and many others. The term ""classical"" (Sanskrit: ""Shastriya"") denotes the ancient Indian Shastra-based performing arts.
The text Natya Shastra describes religious arts as a form as margi, or a ""spiritual traditional path"" that liberates the soul, while the folk entertainment is called desi, or a ""regional popular practice"".
Indian classical dances are traditionally performed as an expressive drama-dance form of religious performance art, related to Vaishnavism, Shaivism, Shaktism, pan-Hindu Epics and the Vedic literature, or a folksy entertainment that includes story-telling from Sanskrit or regional language plays. As a religious art, they are either performed inside the sanctum of a Hindu temple, or near it. Folksy entertainment may also be performed in temple grounds or any fairground, typically in a rural setting by travelling troupes of artists; alternatively, they have been performed inside the halls of royal courts or public squares during festivals.
However, this is not the case for Kathak, Manipuri and Chhau as it has their own uniqueness. Kathak can be also performed on courtyards of mosques and had Muslim elements while Manipuri had the huyen langlon genre which focuses on combat. Like Manipuri, Chhau also had elements on combat.
The Natya Shastra mentions four Pravrittis (traditions, genres) of ancient dance-drama in vogue when it was composed – Avanti (Ujjain, central), Dakshinatya (south), Panchali (north, west) and Odra-Magadhi (east).
Sources differ in their list of Indian classical dance forms. Encyclopædia Britannica mentions six dances. The Sangeet Natak Akademi has given recognition to eight Indian dances. The Indian government's Ministry of Culture includes nine dance forms. Scholars such as Drid Williams and others include Yakshagana and Bhagavata Mela to the nine classical Indian dances in the Sangeet Natak Akademi list.
The classical dance forms recognised by the Sangeet Natak Akademi and the Ministry of Culture are:
Some famous Indian classical dancers are: 
Bharatanatyam - Rukmini Devi, Padma Subrahmanyam, Vyjayanthimala, Sheema Kermani, Padmini
Kathak - Birju Maharaj, Nahid Siddiqui, Lacchu Maharaj, Gopi Krishna, Saswati Sen, Manjari Chaturvedi
Kathakali - Kalamandalam Krishnan Nair
Kuchipudi - Mallika Sarabhai, V. Satyanarayana Sarma, Deepa Shashindran
Manipuri - Guru Bipin Singh, Darshana Jhaveri, Jhaveri Sisters, Devjani Chaliha, Amala Shankar
Mohiniyattam - Kalamandalam Kalyanikutty Amma, Shobhana, Sunanda Nair, Kalamandalam Radhika, Thankamani, Kalamandalam Hymavathy
Odissi - Sujata Mohapatra, Madhavi Mudgal, Kelucharan Mohapatra, Surendra Nath Jena, Shobana Sahajananan, Minati Mishra
Sattriya - Indira P. P. Bora, Ghanakanta Bora, Sarodi Saikia
All major classical Indian dance forms include in repertoire, three categories of performance in the Natya Shastra. These are Nritta, Nritya and Natya:
All classical dances of India used similar symbolism and rules of gestures in abhinaya (acting). The roots of abhinaya are found in the Natyashastra text which defines drama in verse 6.10 as that which aesthetically arouses joy in the spectator, through the medium of actor's art of communication, that helps connect and transport the individual into a super sensual inner state of being. A performance art, asserts Natyashastra, connects the artists and the audience through abhinaya (literally, ""carrying to the spectators""), that is applying body-speech-mind and scene, wherein the actors communicate to the audience, through song and music. Drama in this ancient Sanskrit text, this is an art to engage every aspect of life, to glorify and gift a state of joyful consciousness.
The communication through symbols is in the form of expressive gestures (mudras or hastas) and pantomime set to music. The gestures and facial expressions convey the ras (sentiment, emotional taste) and bhava (mood) of the underlying story. In Hindu classical dances, the artist successfully expresses the spiritual ideas by paying attention to four aspects of a performance:
Indian folk dances, which typically consist of a few simple steps, are performed throughout the world to celebrate a new season, childbirth, weddings, festivals, and other social occasions. In some Indian folk dances, men and women perform separately; in others, they dance together. On most occasions, the dancers will sing accompanied by musicians. Most folk dances have intricately-designed costumes. Although a number of structured, ancient folk and tribal dances exist, many others are evolving.
The Sutradhari (సూత్రధారి) is the most important actor in a Yakshagana, and plays multiple characters. Yakshaganam evolved into Harikatha, and they are considered synonymous. Their dances are similar; one person plays from excerpts from Palkuriki Somanatha, Srinatha, and others. Harikatha consists of samvaadam (సంవాదం; discussion), padyam (పద్యం; poetry), and daruvu (దరువు; rhythm). It typically begins with ""భక్తజనులారా! వినండి హరికథ! వినగ వేడుక గలిగే"" (""O devotees! Listen to this Harikatha and be delighted!"") Those involved in Harikatha Kalakshepam (హరికథా కాలక్షేపం) are known as Harikatha Dasu (హరికథ దాసు) or Harikatha Bhagavatar (హరికథ భాగవతార్). In Andhra Pradesh, the first Harikatha artist is believed to have been Gokulapati Koormanathakavi (గోకులపాటి కూర్మనాథకవి) from the state's northern districts, who wrote and popularised the Mrityunjaya Vilaasam (మృత్యుంజయ విలాసం).[unreliable source?]
Raut Nacha is a traditional folk dance usually done by Yadavs, a caste which considers itself descendants of Krishna, as an expression of worship. Performed for Dev Udhni Ekadashi (the gods' awakening after a brief rest), it resembles Krishna's raslila. Pandavani, Panthi, Suwa dance is also folk dance.
Nati is the traditional dance of Himachal Pradesh's Sirmaur, Kullu and Shimla districts. The dance is listed in Guinness World Records as having ""the greatest number of people attending and participating in a Nati dance lesson at a single venue"".
Dances in Haryana include:
The Jammu and Kashmir region is blessed with natural and cultural beauty. The Union Territory of Jammu and Kashmir has many folk dances performed on different occasions.
The main folk dance performed in the Jammu region are- Kud Dance, Chajja Dance, Crow Dance, Dogri Bhangra etc.
Dumhal is a ceremonial dance performed by men of the Wattal tribe. Dancers wear long, colourful robes and tall, conical caps studded with beads and shells. They move in a procession, carrying a banner. The banner is buried and the men dance, forming a circle, accompanied by singing and a drum.
 In Maharashtra and southern Madhya Pradesh, it is performed by women wearing nine-yard-long saris. The songs are sung at a quick tempo.
Chang Lo (also known as Sua Lua) is performed by the Chang Naga of Nagaland, originally to celebrate victory in war. It is presently a part of community celebrations, such as Poanglem, a three-day festival preceding the harvest. Costumes include the traditional Naga warrior and female finery.
Laudi Khela, traditionally performed by young Gopal men during the Dola festival, has been waning in popularity.
Bagha Nacha, a tiger dance, is performed during festivals. Male dancers paint their skin with yellow and black stripes, like a tiger, and attach a tail.
Ghumra dance, originally performed during wars to encourage soldiers, is accompanied by a drum and is popular in Kalahandi district.
The Sambalpuri karma dance is performed during the harvest festival of Karma in the month of Bhadra.
Jhumar is performed in northern and western Odisha during festivals and the harvest season.
Keisabadi, performed by men, is based on the story of Radha and Krishna and accompanied by singing in Sambalpuri.
Garadi, a well-known dance in Puducherry, is performed at festivals. Its origin is a product of mythology; when Rama (hero of the epic Ramayana) defeated Ravana, the vanars (monkeys) danced to celebrate his victory. Garadi is usually performed for five to eight hours. Dancers wear vanar masks, carry sticks and wear ten chiming anjali (iron rings) as they dance, accompanied by singing and two large ramadolu drums.
Bhangra is one of Punjab's most popular dances, and has become part of Asian culture. Originally associated with Sikh farmers celebrating the harvest and accompanied by a dhol, bhangra is now danced at any celebration with a variety of instruments; a number of regional variations exist.
Giddha, danced by women in colourful costumes, is derived from ring dancing and includes the singing of couplets (known as bolliyan) in Punjabi. Malwai Giddha is danced by men in Malwa.
Kikkli is performed by two colourfully-dressed girls who hold crossed hands and twirl each other in a circle (balancing their positions), accompanied by folk songs.
Ghoomar is a traditional women's dance in Rajasthan and Haryana. It is performed by groups of women in swirling skirts, accompanied by men and women singing. The dance gets its name from ghoomna, the spinning which displays the colourful, flowing ghaghara (the long Rajasthani skirt). ghoomer dance
'
The Kalbelia dance is performed by women in black, swirling skirts (as snakes), accompanied by male snake charmers playing beens and other instruments. The Kalbelia folk songs and dances were added to UNESCO's Representative List of the Intangible Cultural Heritage of Humanity in 2010.
The Kachchhi Ghodi dance is primarily performed in the Shekhawati region of north-eastern Rajasthan. The costumed horse and bandit dancers have mock fights while a singer narrates tales of local bandits. It is performed during weddings and other social occasions.
Suisini is a dance from Rajasthan originating from mediaeval India, in recent times it has almost disappeared.
Maruni, also popular in Nepal, Darjeeling, Assam, Bhutan and Myanmar, is accompanied by musicians playing the Naumati Baja.
There are so many other dances like Ghantu dance,chu fauat,sikmari,Denzongcnenha,
Khukhuri naach,chutkeynaach.
Parai Attam is a Tamil dance which is accompanied by a parai drum.
Kummi, one of Tamil Nadu's oldest folk dances, is accompanied by hand-clapping rather than musical instruments. Women form a circle and dance; one sings, with the other dancers taking turns. A number of varieties exist. Kummi is danced at festivals and other special occasions.
Karakattam is danced to praise Mariamman, the Hindu rain goddess. Dancers balance pots of water on their heads. There are two types of Karakattam. Aatta Karagam is danced with decorated pots on the dancers' heads and symbolises joy and happiness; Sakthi Karagam is danced in temples to praise Mariamman. Drums, singing and pipe instruments accompany the dancers.
Mayilattam, or the peacock dance, is performed by girls dressed as peacocks at village festivals. Similar dances are Kaalai Attam (bull dance), Karadi Attam (bear dance), and Aali Aattam (demon dance) which are performed in the villages during village get-togethers. Vedala Aattam is danced in a demon mask.
Snakes are viewed as protectors. The snake dance is performed by girls dressed in a costume designed like a snake-skin. The dancers move like a snake, making quick biting movements with their head and hands; raised hands, held together, resemble the head of a snake.
Although Oyilattam (dance of beauty) was traditionally performed by men, women have also begun dancing. Participants wearing ankle bells dance in a row, with musical accompaniment; the row lengthens as dancers join in. Oyilattam is most popular in the southern districts and the Kongu Nadu region, and the dance has a variety of styles.
Puliyattam is a tiger dance in which young men paint their bodies and costume themselves as tigers, dancing to drums. The dancers sometimes pretend to capture a goat. A popular dance, Puliyattam is performed during temple festivals.
Poikal attam is known as the false-leg dance. Dancers are attached to a dummy horse at the waist, with the dancer's two legs and their body prop resembling a rider on a horse. The dance illustrates stories from popular folklore.
Bommalattams (puppet shows) are held in every village during festivals and fairs. Many kinds of puppets (such as cloth, wood, and leather), and they are manipulated with strings or wires. The puppeteers stand behind a screen, and the puppets are in front; the stories are from the puranas, epics, and folklore.
Theru Koothu is normally performed by men in an intersection during village festivals in the months of Panguni and Aadi. The performance consists of story-telling, dialogues, songs, and dance. Its stories are taken from the puranas, epics such as the Ramayana and the Mahabharata, and local folklore. The play begins in the late evening, and lasts for several hours. Theru Koothu is popular in northern Tamil Nadu.
Perini Shivatandavam or Perini Thandavam is an ancient dance form which has been recently revived.
Hojagiri is danced by the Tripuri reang(Bru) clan in Tripura. Four to eight women dance acrobatically, while men provide most of the music; the women sing in chorus. The dancers twist and turn, sometimes dancing on an earthen pitcher or balancing a bottle on their heads with a lighted lamp on it.
Sangraing Dance is dance by the Mog community clan in Tripura. many boys and girls dance together and signging together.
The Raslila, danced in North India (primarily Uttar Pradesh), is based on the life of Krishna. Individuals and groups dance, accompanied by singing, chants and instruments. The audience claps and sings along, and the length of each performance varies.
Jhumar, Phag Dance, Daph, Dhamal,  Loor, Gugga, Khor, Gagor .
Chhattisgarh
Goa
List of Indian Dances: Andhra natyam (Art dance of Andhra Pradesh and Telangana, South India)
Bagurumba (folk dance of Assam, North East India)
Bhortal (folk dance of Assam, North East India)
Bhangra (Folk Dance of Punjab, North India)
Bharatnatyam (Tamil Nadu, South India)
Bihu dance (Folk dance of Assam, East India)
Bathukamma (Folk dance of Telangana, South India)
Vaikuntha (Folk Dance of India, Asia)
Chhau (Odisha, West Bengal, East India)
Chholiya (Uttarakhand)
Dollu Kunitha (Folk Dance Of Karnataka, India)
Dandiya (Folk dance of Gujarat, West India)
Deodhani (Folk dance of Assam, North East India)
Dhangari (Folk dance of Maharashtra, West India)
Dhemsa (Tribal dance of Koraput, Odisha)
Domkach (Folk dance of Bihar and Jharkhand)
Dekhni (attractive mixture of folk culture and western music came into existence during Portuguese ruling goa)
Firkal (Folk dance of Jharkhand and Odisha)
Garba (Folk dance of Gujarat, West India)
Giddha (folk dance of Punjab North India)
Ghoomar (folk dance of Rajasthan West India)
Gaudiya Nritya (Classical dance of West Bengal)
Geraiya Nritya (folk tribe dance of Gujarat, India)
Ghumura (Odisha)
Jhumair (folk dance of Jharkhand, Chhattisgarh, Odisha, West Bengal Assam(jhumur))
Kamsale (folk dance of Karnataka )
Kathak (Uttar Pradesh, Classical Indian Dance)
Kathakali (Kerala, India, Incorporates dance)
Kerala Natanam (Indian Dance created by Guru Gopinath)
Krishnanattam
Kuchipudi (Classical Indian Dance, Andhra Pradesh)
Kolattam (folk Tamil Nadu)
Koli Dance (Folk Maharashtra)
Karakattam (folk Tamil Nadu)
Kanyarkali (Folk Dance, Kerala)
Kalbelia (Folk Dance, Rajasthan)
Lavani (Folk Dance, Maharashtra)
Lambadi (Folk Dance, Telangana and Andhra Pradesh)
Mohiniattam (Indian classical dance from Kerala)
Manipuri (Indian classical dance from Manipur)
Matki Dance – Madhya Pradesh
Mardana Jhumar - Jharkhand
Margamkalli- dance form performed by the St. Thomas Christians community of Kerala
Nandi Dwaja ನಂದಿ ಧ್ವಜ (folk dance of Karnataka ಕರ್ನಾಟಕ)
Nati dance (Folk dance of Himachal Pradesh, India)
Nautanki (dance form of Uttar Pradesh)
Odissi aka Orissi (Odisha, East India) (Indian classical dance from Odisha)
Ojapali (folk dance of Assam, North East India)
oyilattam aka oyilattam (Madurai, Tamil Nadu)
Oppana (Kerala)
Patta ಪಟ್ಟ (folk dance of Karnataka ಕರ್ನಾಟಕ)
Panthi (folk dance of Chhattisgarh, India)
Parai Attam (Tamil Nadu)
Puliyattam (folk dance of Tamil Nadu, India)
Perini shiva thandavam (dance form of Telangana) Perini Sivatandavam
Pulikali – Kerala
Popir - Arunachal Pradesh
Raut Nacha (Folk dance of Chhattisgarh, India)
Raas lila (Indian Classical Dance)
Rathwa dance (Folk dance of Chhota Udaipur India)
Soma Kunita ಸೋಮ ಕುಣಿತ (Folk Dance of Karnataka)
Sambalpuri (dance from Odisha)(semi-classical dance of India)
Sattriya (Dance form of Assam)
Thirayattam (Ethnic Dance of Kerala)
Tamasa (Folk dance, Maharashtra)
Tera Taali (Rajasthan)
Thiruvathira (Kerala)
Theyyam (Kerala)
Veeragaase ವೀರಗಾಸೆ (folk dance of Karnataka, South India)
Vilasini Natyam (art dance of Andhra Pradesh, South India)
Yakshagana ಯಕ್ಷಗಾನ (Karavali Region of Karnataka)
Bharatanatyam (Tamil: பரதநாட்டியம்) is an Indian classical dance form that originated in Tamil Nadu. It is a classical dance form recognized by the Sangeet Natak Akademi, and expresses South Indian religious themes and spiritual ideas, particularly of Shaivism and in general of Hinduism and Jainism.
Bharatanatyam word was derived by joining two Sanskrit words: 'Natyam' meaning dance and 'Bharata' which is a mnemonic containing 'Bha' (bhava/emotions), 'Ra' (raga/melody), and 'Ta' (tala/rhythm). Thus the term Bharatanatyam means a dance that expresses Bhava, Raga, and Tala.
A description of precursors of Bharatanatyam from the 2nd century CE can be found in the ancient Tamil epic Silappatikaram, while temple sculptures of the 6th to 9th century CE suggest dance was a refined performance art by the mid-1st millennium CE. Sadiraattam, which was renamed Bharatanatyam in 1932, is the oldest classical dance tradition in India. Bharatanatyam is the state dance form of Tamil Nadu.
Bharatanatyam contains different types of bani. Bani, or ""tradition"", is a term used to describe the dance technique and style specific to a guru or school, often named for the village of the guru. Bharatanatyam style is noted for its fixed upper torso, bent legs, and flexed knees (Aramandi) combined with footwork, and a vocabulary of sign language based on gestures of hands, eyes, and face muscles. The dance is accompanied by music and a singer, and typically the dancer's guru is present as the nattuvanar or director-conductor of the performance and art. The performance repertoire of Bharatanatyam, like other classical dances, includes nrita (pure dance), nritya (Conveys a meaning to the audience through hand gestures) and natya (Consists of the elements of drama).
A program of bharatanatyam usually lasts two hours without interruption and includes a specific list of procedures, all performed by one dancer, who does not leave the stage or change costume. The accompanying orchestra—composed of drums, drone, and singer—occupies the back of the stage, led by the guru, or the teacher, of the dancer.
Sadiraattam remained exclusive to Hindu temples through the 19th century. It was banned by the colonial British government in 1910, but the Indian community protested against the ban and expanded its performance outside temples in the 20th century as Bharatanatyam. Modern stage productions of Bharatanatyam have become popular throughout India and include performances that are purely dance-based on non-religious ideas and fusion themes. The Thanjavur Quartet developed the basic structure of modern Bharatanatyam by formalizing it.
In 1932, E Krishna Iyer and Rukmini Devi Arundale put forward a proposal to rename Sadiraattam  (Tamil: சதிராட்டம்), also known as Parathaiyar Aattam or Thevarattam, as Bharatanatyam, to give the dance form a measure of respect, at a meeting of the Madras Music Academy. They also were instrumental in modifying mainly the Pandanallur style of dance. The word Bharatam is also seen as a backronym, with bha standing for bhavam (feelings, emotions), ra for ragam (melody, framework for musical notes), and tam for talam (rhythm). The term Natyam is a Sanskrit word for ""dance"". The compound word Bharatanatyam is seen to connote a dance that harmoniously expresses bhavam, ragam and talam.
The theoretical foundations of dance Bharatanatyam are found first in Kootha Nool in Tamil and then referred also in Natya Shastra, a Sanskrit text of performance arts.
Natya Shastra is attributed to the ancient scholar Bharata Muni, and its first complete compilation is dated to between 200 BCE and 200 CE, but estimates vary between 500 BCE and 500 CE. The most studied version of the Natya Shastra text consists of about 6000 verses structured into 36 chapters. The text, states Natalia Lidova, describes the theory of Tāṇḍava dance (Shiva), the theory of rasa, of bhāva, expression, gestures, acting techniques, basic steps, standing postures—all of which are part of Indian classical dances. Dance and performance arts, states this text, are a form of expression of spiritual ideas, virtues and the essence of scriptures.
Historical references to dance are found in the Tamil epics Silappatikaram (c. 2nd century CE) and Manimegalai (c. 6th century). The ancient text Silappatikaram, includes a story of a dancing girl named Madhavi; it describes the dance training regimen called Arangatrau Kathai of Madhavi in verses 113 through 159. The carvings in Kanchipuram's Shiva temple that have been dated to 6th to 9th century CE suggest dance was a well-developed performance art by about the mid 1st millennium CE.
A famous example of illustrative sculpture is in the southern gateway of the Chidambaram temple (≈12th century) dedicated to the Hindu god Shiva, where 108 poses, described as karanas in the Natya Shastra, are carved in stone.
Bharatanatyam shares the dance poses of many ancient Shiva sculptures in Hindu temples. The Cave 1 of the Badami cave temples, dated to the 7th century, portrays the Tandava-dancing Shiva as Nataraja. The image, 5 feet (1.5 m) tall, has 18 arms in a form that expresses the dance positions arranged in a geometric pattern. The arms of Shiva express mudras (symbolic hand gestures), that are used in Bharatanatyam.
Some colonial Indologists and modern authors have argued that Bharatanatyam is a descendant of an ancient Devadasi (lit. 'servant girls of Devas') culture, suggesting a historical origin back to between 300 BCE and 300 CE. Modern scholars have questioned this theory for lack of any direct textual or archeological evidence. Historic sculptures and texts do describe and project dancing girls, as well as temple quarters dedicated to women, but they do not state them to be courtesans and prostitutes as alleged by early colonial Indologists. According to Davesh Soneji, a critical examination of evidence suggests that courtesan dancing is a phenomenon of the modern era, beginning in the late 16th or the 17th century of the Nayaka period of Tamil Nadu. According to James Lochtefeld, classical dance remained exclusive to Hindu temples through the 19th century, only in the 20th century appearing on stage outside the temples. Further, the Thanjavur Maratha kingdom patronized classical dance.
With the arrival of the East India Company in the 18th century, and British colonial rule in the 19th, classical Indian dance forms were ridiculed and discouraged, and these performance arts declined. Christian missionaries and British officials presented ""nautch girls"" of north India (Kathak) and ""devadasis"" of south India (Bharatanatyam) as evidence of ""harlots, debased erotic culture, slavery to idols and priests"" tradition, and Christian missionaries demanded that this must be stopped, launching the ""anti-dance movement"" in 1892. The anti-dance camp accused the dance form as a front for prostitution, while revivalists questioned the constructed colonial histories.
In 1910, the Madras Presidency of the British Empire banned temple dancing, and with it the classical dance tradition in Hindu temples.
The banning of temple dancing stemmed from the 1892 anti-dance movement and new, liberal colonial perspectives. What the English imagined nineteenth-century modernity to be did not include what they regarded Bharatanatyam to be, which they regarded as indecent. Coming from a deep orientalist perspective, the morality of people who performed Bharatanatyam was called into question. Accusations of prostitution were thrown around. Some women from traditionally performing communities were used as a way to showcase obscenity. New reforms disregarded local issues like production of the arts for the sake of liberalism and felt able to impose disruptive reforms that reshaped lives at all levels and subjected people to new standards. Colonial reforms were largely unsympathetic to local traditions, and dismissive of the industry surrounding producing art. The adoption of Anglo-Indian laws that imposed certain restrictions and regulations on certain expressions of sexuality, and more so regulations on bodies and sex in general, which in turn affected traditional dance practices. Temple dancing became caught in a web of multiple political agendas, hoping to bend this burgeoning morality issue to suit their cause. Colonial denunciations of the practice of temple dancing were caught up in liberal ideals of bringing modernity to India, where modernity was tied to Anglo-Protestant moral ideas about how bodies are viewed and how sexuality was presented.
The 1910 ban triggered protests against the stereotyping and dehumanization of temple dancers. Tamil people were concerned that a historic and rich dance tradition was being victimized under the excuse of social reform. Classical art revivalists such as E. Krishna Iyer, a lawyer who had learned from traditional practitioners of Sadir, questioned the cultural discrimination and the assumed connection, asking why prostitution needs years of training for performance arts, and how killing performance arts could end any evils in society. Iyer was arrested and sentenced to prison on charges of nationalism, who while serving out his prison term persuaded his fellow political prisoners to support Bharatanatyam.
While the British colonial government enforced laws to suppress Hindu temple dances, some from the West, such as the American dancer Esther Sherman moved to India in 1930, learned Indian classical dances, changed her name to Ragini Devi, and joined the movement to revive Bharatanatyam and other ancient dance arts.
The Indian independence movement in the early 20th century, already in progress, became a period of cultural foment and initiated an effort by its people to reclaim their culture and rediscover history. In this period of cultural and political turmoil, Bharatanatyam was revived as a mainstream dance outside of Hindu temples by artists such as Rukmini Devi Arundale, Balasaraswati and Yamini Krishnamurti They championed and performed the Pandanallur style and Thanjavur styles of Bharatanatyam.
Nationalist movements that brought revitalizing devadasis up as an issue to focus on viewed it as a way to critique the imposition of colonial morality on India. However, the revival movement was not without Western influence. Nationalist movements that also focused on devadasis revival were influenced by Western ideas of democratization of arts. Part of the revival movement was making the opportunity to dance open to more people. Nationalist movements that focused on revival were also influenced by Western ideology through their propagation that part of the revival movement is a reassertion of traditional values, as well as a moment to remind people of the country’s cultural heritage and reestablish a sense of identity. Fighting for freedom from the British and fighting for civil liberties included debates about morality, and how gender impacts morality. The revival movement moralized devadasis by democratizing the art, while also decorating it with the female performing class. Figures like Rukmini Devi Arundale, who are credited with revitalizing Bharatanatyam, also shifted the practice to appeal to middle to upper-class women. Rukmini Devi Arundale is credited with helping develop the Kalakshetra style of Bharatanatyam. There was an emphasis on building a modern India through Indian nationalism, which tied in with protecting traditional artistic traditions. The decommercialization and sanitation of Bharatanatyam for the sake of protecting the spirit of the art is part of Bharatanatyam’s revival. Bharatanatyam’s successful revival meant that it was regarded as a classical dance tradition specific to India, as opposed to a cultural dance that had been changed by colonial censorship. It was becoming a modern nation to have a traditional dance that was practiced recreationally and was nationally recognized. With the standardization of Bharatanatyam, there came books based on historic texts, like Natya Shastra, which described the different movements.  Evidence of a successful revival movement of Bharatanatyam through Indian Nationalist movements was the introduction of state-sponsored dance festivals in 1955 in an independent India. These festivals were put on to display art with religious, social, and cultural connotations that have some regional diversity on a common national platform.
In the late 20th century, Tamil Hindu migrants reintroduced the traditions of temple dancing in British Tamil temples.
Bharatanatyam is traditionally a team performance art that consists of a solo dancer, accompanied by musicians and one or more singers. It is described as classical art because the theory of musical notes, vocal performance, and the dance movement reflect ideas of the Sanskrit treatise Natya Shastra and other Sanskrit and Tamil texts, such as the Abhinaya Darpana.
The solo artist (ekaharya) in Bharatanatyam is dressed in a colorful sari, adorned with jewelry and presents a dance synchronized with Indian classical music. The hand and facial gestures are a coded sign language able to recite legends and spiritual ideas from the Mahabharata, the Ramayana, the Puranas and historic drama texts. The dancer deploys turns or specific body movements to mark punctuations in the story or the entry of a different character in the play or legend being acted out through dance. Abhinaya is the art of expression in Indian aesthetics; footwork, body language, postures, musical notes, the tones of the vocalist, aesthetics and costumes integrate to express and communicate the underlying text.
In modern adaptations, Bharatanatyam dance troupes may involve many dancers who play specific characters in a story, creatively choreographed to ease the interpretation and expand the experience by the audience.
The repertoire of Bharatanatyam, like all major classical Indian dance forms, follows the three categories of performance in the Natya Shastra. These are Nritta (Nirutham), Nritya (Niruthiyam) and Natya (Natyam).
The purpose
Bharata Natyam is an art which consecrates the body (...)the dancer, who dissolves her identity in rhythm and music, makes her body an instrument, at least for the duration of the dance, for the experience and expression of the spirit.The traditional order of Bharata Natyam recital viz. alarippu, jatiswaram, varnam, padams, tillana and the shloka is the correct sequence in the practice of this art, which is an artistic Yoga, for revealing the spiritual through the corporeal.
A Bharatanatyam arangetram is a solo debut performance that signifies the completion of initial formal training of a young dancer, female or male in Indian classical dance. The term Arangetram translates to ""ascending the stage"". This performance is typically done ten to twelve years after a dancer begins learning Bharatanatyam. Still, more importantly, it is done when the guru believes the student is ready for a solo performance. This solo debut is synonymous with a ""coming-of-age"" celebration. The arangetram is a culmination of multiple years of hard work by the student and the guru, and it is an opportunity for the dancer to showcase his or her dedication and skills developed over the years. Throughout this debut, the dancer performs a series of dances. The dancer must build up his or her concentration and stamina to perform solo dances for approximately three hours. Each dance performed symbolizes various aspects of Hindu religion.
A traditional Bharatanatyam arangetram dance performance follows a seven to eight-part order of presentation. This set is called Margam.
The Arangetram performance typically begins with a dance called the Pushpanjali, which translates to ""offering of flowers"". In this dance, the performer offers flowers and salutations to the Hindu deities, the guru, and the audience as a mark of respect. The beginning of the dance symbolizes supplication, from which the dancer then commences the rest of the performance.
The presentation can also begin with a rhythmic invocation (vandana) called the Alarippu. It is a pure dance, which combines a thank you and benediction for blessings from the gods and goddesses, the guru and the gathered performance team. It also serves as a preliminary warm-up dance, without melody, to enable the dancer to loosen their body, and journey away from distractions and towards single-minded focus.
The next stage of the performance adds melody to the movement of Alarippu, and this is called Jatiswaram. The dance remains a prelim technical performance (nritta), pure in form and without any expressed words. The drums set the beat, of any Carnatic music raga (melody). They perform a sequence (Korvai) to the rhythm of the beat, presenting to the audience the unity of music, rhythm and movements.
The performance sequence then adds Shabdam (expressed words). This is the first item of Margam where expressions are introduced. The solo dancer, the vocalist(s), and the musical team, in this stage of the production, present short compositions, with words and meaning, in a spectrum of moods. This performance praises God (such as Krishna, Shiva, Rama, and Murugan) and their qualities.
The performance thereafter evolves into the Varnam stage. This marks the arrival into the sanctum sanctorum core of the performance. It is the longest section and the nritya. A traditional Varnam may be as long as 30–45 minutes or sometimes an hour. Varnam offers huge scope for improvisation and an experienced dancer can stretch the Varnam to a desirable length. The artist presents the play or the main composition, reveling in all their movements, silently communicating the text through codified gestures and footwork, harmoniously with the music, rhythmically punctuated. The dancer performs complicated moves, such as expressing a verse at two speeds. Their hands and body tell a story, whether of love and longing or of a battle between the good and the evil, as the musicians envelop them with musical notes and tones that set the appropriate mood.
The Padam is next. This is the stage of reverence, of simplicity, of abhinaya (expression) of the solemn spiritual message or devotional religious prayer (bhakti). The music is lighter, the chant intimate, the dance emotional. The choreography attempts to express rasa (emotional taste) and a mood, while the recital may include items such as a keertanam (expressing devotion), a javali (expressing divine love) or something else.
The performance sequence ends with a Tillana, the climax. It closes out the nritya portion, the movements exit the temple of expressive dance, returning to the nritta style, where a series of pure movement and music are rhythmically performed. Therewith the performance ends.[note 1]
The seventh and final item in the sequence can be either a Shlokam or a Mangalam. The dancer calls for blessings on the people all around.
The overall sequence of Bharatanatyam, states Balasaraswati, thus moves from ""mere meter; then melody and meter; continuing with music, meaning and meter; its expansion in the centerpiece of the varnam; thereafter, music and meaning without meter; (...) a non-metrical song at the end. We see a most wonderful completeness and symmetry in this art"".
The costume of a female Bharatanatyam dancer resembles a Tamil Hindu bridal dress. It typically consists of a sari in bright colors with golden or silver zari embroidery on the borders. The costume can be stitched from the sari, with individual pieces for a bottom (either a skirt or salwar-shaped pants), a pleated piece which falls in front and opens like a hand fan when the dancer flexes her knees or performs footwork, a hip piece that covers the seat of the pant/skirt, and a torso piece that looks like an aanchal (i.e. the draped part of a regular sari). Some dancers also opt for an unstitched sari that is draped specially, with the single piece of cloth starting around the legs like a dhoti, then upwards along the front torso, over the left shoulder, and then down the back with its end held at the waist by a jeweled belt. The costume of a male Bharatanatyam dancer is usually either a sari or a white cotton cloth draped around the legs and bottom half of the body like a dhoti. During performances, the upper body of the male dancer remains bare. Male dancers typically do not wear stitched costumes.
Both female and male dancers wear elaborate jewelry on their ears, nose, neck, and wrists. Female dancers wear additional jewelry on their heads that emphasizes their hairline and parting. They also wear a smaller piece of jewelry on each side of their parting. These represent the sun and the moon.
Long hair on both male and female dancers is either secured by a bun or a braid. Female dancers with short hair often use braid extensions or bun hair pieces to simulate long hair. Female dancers also wear imitation flowers made of either cloth or paper around their braids or buns. These are known as (or gajra).
Both male and female dancers wear makeup, including foundation, blush, lipstick, and thick eyeliner or kohl, which helps the audience see and understand their facial expressions.
All dancers wear leather anklets on each foot, which are called salangai or ghungroos. These are made of small bells attached to a broad leather strap with belts that secure them at the back of the ankle. The bells are arranged in uniform rows and can be heard when the dancer moves their feet. The salangai helps emphasize the rhythm of the music as well as the dancer's footwork.
Lastly, all dancers outline their hands and feet with red kumkum powder or alta, a tradition that helps the audience easily see their hand and foot gestures.
For classes, training, practice, or rehearsals, dancers traditionally wear a special dance sari. These saris are always cotton and have a shorter breadth than normal saris, falling at the knees rather than the ankles. These are paired with cotton pyjamas and blouses. The sari is worn with pleats at the front and tied tightly around the torso and hips. However, in recent times, dancers also opt for salwar kameez or athletic wear (like T-shirts and leggings) when not performing. [citation needed]
The accompanying music to Bharatanatyam is in the Carnatic style of South India, as is the recitation and chanting. The vocalist is called nattuvanar, typically also the conductor of the entire performance, who may be the guru of the dancer and may also be playing cymbals or one of the musical instruments. The recited verses and text in Bharatanatyam are in Tamil, Telugu, Kannada and Sanskrit.
The instruments used include the mridangam (double-sided drum), nadaswaram (long type of oboe made from black wood), nattuvangam (cymbals), the flute, violin and veena.
Bharatanatyam, like all classical dances of India, uses symbolism in its abhinaya (acting) and its goals. The roots of abhinaya appear in the Natya Shastra text, which defines drama in verse 6.10 as something that aesthetically arouses joy in the spectator, through the medium of the actor's art of communication, that helps connect and transport the individual into a sensual inner state of being.  A performance art, asserts Natya Shastra, connects the artists and the audience through abhinaya (literally, ""carrying to the spectators""), that is applying body-speech-mind and scene, wherein the actors communicate to the audience, through song and music.  Drama in this ancient Sanskrit text, thus is an art that engages every aspect of life to glorify and give a state of joyful consciousness. 
The communication through symbols is in the form of expressive gestures and pantomime set to music. The gestures and facial expressions convey the ras (sentiment, emotional taste) and bhava (mood) of the underlying story. In the Hindu texts on dance, the dancer successfully expresses the spiritual ideas by paying attention to four aspects of a performance: Angika (gestures and body language), Vachika (song, recitation, music and rhythm), Aharya (stage setting, costume, makeup, jewelry), and Sattvika (artist's mental disposition and emotional connection with the story and audience, wherein the artist's inner and outer state resonates). Abhinaya draws out the bhava (mood, psychological states).
The gestures used in Bharatanatyam are called Hasta (or mudras). These symbols are of three types: asamyuta hastas (single hand gestures), samyuta hastas (two hand gestures), and nrtta hastas (dance hand gestures). Like words in a glossary, these gestures are presented in the nritta as a list or embellishment to a prelim performance. In nritya stage of Bharatanatyam, these symbols set in a certain sequence become sentences with meaning, with emotions expressed through facial expressions and other aspects of abhinaya. The basic standing position is called as Aramandi.
Bharatanatyam contains at least 20 asanas found in modern yoga, including Dhanurasana (the bow, a back-arch); Chakrasana (the wheel, a standing back-arch); Vrikshasana (the tree, a standing pose); and Natarajasana, the pose of dancing Shiva. 108 karanas of classical temple dance are represented in temple statuary; they depict the devadasi temple dancers who made use of yoga asanas in their dancing. Bharatanatyam is also considered a form of Bhakti Yoga. However, Natarajasana is not found in any medieval hatha yoga text; it was among the many asanas introduced into modern yoga by Krishnamacharya in the early 20th century.
Bharatanatyam rapidly expanded after India gained independence from British rule in 1947. It is now the most popular classical Indian dance style in India, enjoys a high degree of support in expatriate Indian communities, and is considered to be synonymous with Indian dance by many foreigners unaware of the diversity of dances and performance arts in Indian culture. In the second half of the 20th century, Bharatanatyam has been to Indian dance tradition what ballet has been in the West.
When the British government tried to attempt to ban Bharatanatyam traditions, it went on and revived by moving outside the Hindu temple and religious ideas. However, post-independence, with rising interest in its history, the ancient traditions, the invocation rituals and the spiritually expressive part of the dance has returned. Many innovations and developments in modern Bharatanatyam, states Anne-Marie Geston, are of a quasi-religious type. Major cities in India now have numerous schools that offer lessons in Bharatanatyam, and these cities host hundreds of shows every year.
Outside India, Bharatanatyam is a sought-after and studied dance, states Meduri, in academic institutes in the United States, Europe, Canada, Australia,  the Gulf States, Sri Lanka, Malaysia, New Zealand, Bangladesh and Singapore. For expat Indian and Tamil communities in many countries, it is a source and means for social life and community bonding. Contemporary Bharatanatyam choreographies include both male and female dancers.
In 2020, an estimated 10,000 dancers got together in Chennai, India, to break the world record for the largest Bharatanatyam performance. The previous record of 7,190 dancers was set in Chidambaram in 2019.
The Indian classical dances are the dance forms representing the exemplary standards within the traditional and long-established forms or styles of the Indian culture. According to the Encyclopedia Britannica, there are six classical dance forms of India. However, the number of classical dances vary in accordance to various sources.
Features, It involves rigorous and systematic training
Positions are very precise and codified
Basic movements need to be taught by dance guru
first before a student has basic knowledge to grasp any choreography.
Dance movements in classical dance are complex and need repeated practice before one master them.
It takes several years of training to master classical dance
Classical dance involves lots of discipline and a specific posture is maintained.
In Indian Classical dance, the dance describes stories of Gods and Goddesses through sophisticated facial expressions and elaborate codified hand gestures
Classical dances recognised by the Sangeet Natak Akademi are Bharatanatyam (from Tamil Nadu), Kathak (from Uttar Pradesh), Kathakali (from Kerala), Kuchipudi (from Andhra Pradesh), Manipuri (from Manipur), Mohiniyattam (from Kerala) Odissi (from Odisha), Sattriya (from Assam)
Classical dances recognised by the Ministry of Culture are Chhau (from Eastern India) and Gaudiya Nritya (from Eastern India)
The Indian classical dances are the dance forms representing the exemplary standards within the traditional and long-established forms or styles of the Indian culture. According to the Encyclopedia Britannica, there are six classical dance forms of India. However, the number of classical dances vary in accordance to various sources.
Bharatnatyam is a classical Indian dance form that originates from that originates in the temples of Tamil Nadu. The dance form is a reconstruction os Sadir, the art of temple dancers devadasis. Lord Shiva as Nataraja is considered the God of this dance form. Today, it is one of the most popular and widely performed dance form practiced by male and female dancers all over the world. The original name of Bharatnatyam was Sadir, Chinnamelan and Dasi Attam. A possible origin of the Bharatnatyam  is that it comes after Bharata Muni, the author of Natya Shastra. Another popular etymology (explanation of the name) holds “Bhavan” means expression, “ragam” means melody and “Talam” means rhythm, finally, “Natyam” means dance, so the dance which has Bhavan, Ragam and Talam is called Bharatnatyam.
Bharatnatyam is a solo dance with two aspects Lasya, the graceful and feminine aspects associated with Goddess Parvati and Tandava , the masculine and rigorous aspects associated with Lord Shiva.
The Bharatnatyam training has been given its present shape by the Tanjore brothers. It begins with the practice of Adavus and then the students are taught the Margam from Pushpanjli, Kautvam, Alarippu, Jatiswaram, Sabdam, Varnam, Padams, Tilina. After many years of training, a student can perform an “arangetram”, the first solo performance by a student. Bharatnatyam compositions are based on Carnatic Music system of Ragams and talams. It features graceful and assertive movements that are performed imaginary lines and geometrical patterns
Kathak is a dance form that originates from Uttar Pradesh, North India. It is said that: “Katha kahe so kathak,” which means that ‘He who tells a story is a Kathak’. The Kathak or professional story-teller had a thorough knowledge of the epics and mythology, village legends and local beliefs. It is said that the kathak was so adept at this art that he often kept a whole village absorbed while he sat  entertaining them.
Kathak is characterised bt graceful movements, subtle expressions and sophisticated use of rhythm. Technical virtuosity and flamboyance is complimented by subtlety in the depiction of moods and emotions. Pure dance is the predominant feature of Kathak. In Kathak, the dancer addresses directly to the audience. The knees are not flexed outwards or forwards as in the other classical dance form of India. The feet, with ghungroos around the ankles, beat out a whole range of rhythmic sounds. Skill in rendering intricate beats is fundamental to the style.
Although, Kathak was an established tradition as a medium of worship during the Vaishnava age, it started being performed in courts with the coming of the Mughals. The dancer moved from thr temple courtyards to the palace durbar and this brought changes on the presentation as we know it today. Kathak saw a great period of glory in the 19th century during the reign of Wajid Ali Shah, the last nawab of Awadh. It was under his patronage that the Lucknow gharana was established. The two other important gharanas in Kathak are the Jaipur gharana and the Banaras gharana.
Kathakali (IAST: Kathakaḷi Malayalam: കഥകളി) is a traditional form of classical Indian dance, and one of the most complex forms of Indian theatre. It is a ""story play"" genre of art, but one distinguished by the elaborately colourful make-up and costumes of the traditional male actor-dancers.[note 1] It is native to the Malayalam-speaking southwestern region of Kerala and is almost entirely practiced by Malayali people.
Kathakali's roots are unclear. The fully developed style of Kathakali originated around the 16th century, but its roots are in the temple and folk arts (such as Krishnanattam and religious drama of the kingdom of the Zamorin of Calicut) of the southwestern Indian peninsula, which are traceable to at least the 1st millennium CE. A Kathakali performance, like all classical dance arts of India, synthesizes music, vocal performers, choreography and hand and facial gestures together to express ideas. However, Kathakali differs in that it also incorporates movements from ancient Indian martial arts and athletic traditions of South India. Kathakali also differs in that the structure and details of its art form developed in the courts and theatres of Hindu principalities, unlike other classical Indian dances which primarily developed in Hindu temples and monastic schools.[citation needed]
The traditional themes of the Kathakali are folk stories, religious legends and spiritual ideas from the Hindu epics and the Puranas. The vocal performance has traditionally been performed in Sanskritised Malayalam. In modern compositions, Indian Kathakali troupes have included women artistes, and adapted Western stories and plays such as those by Shakespeare. In 2011, a performance expressing Christian doctrine was staged for the first time in Kerala.
The term Kathakali is derived from katha (Malayalam: കഥ, from Sanskrit) which means ""story or a conversation, or a traditional tale"", and kaḷi (Malayalam: കളി) which means ""performance"" or ""play"". The dance symbolises the eternal fight between good and evil.
Elements and aspects of Kathakali are taken from ancient Sanskrit texts such as the Natya Shastra. The Natya Shastra is attributed to sage Bharata, and its first complete compilation is dated to between 200 BC and 200 AD, but estimates vary between 500 BC and 500 AD.
The most studied version of the Natya Shastra text consists of about 6000 verses structured into 36 chapters. The text, states Natalia Lidova, describes the theory of Tāṇḍava dance (Shiva), the theory of rasa, of bhāva, expression, gestures, acting techniques, basic steps, standing postures–all of which are part of Indian classical dances including Kathakali. Dance and performance arts, states this ancient Hindu text, are a form of expression of spiritual ideas, virtues and the essence of scriptures.
The roots of  Kathakali are unclear. Jones and Ryan state it is more than 500 years old. Kathakali emerged as a distinct genre of performance art during the 16th and 17th centuries in Kerala. The roots of  Kathakali, states Mahinder Singh, are more ancient and some 1500 years old.
According to Farley Richmond and other scholars, Kathakali shares many elements such as costumes with ancient Indian performance arts such as Kutiyattam (classical Sanskrit drama) and medieval era Krishnanattam, even though a detailed examination shows differences. Kutiyattam, adds Richmond, is ""one of the oldest continuously performed theatre forms in India, and it may well be the oldest surviving art form of the ancient world"". Kutiyattam, traditionally, was performed in theatres specially designed and attached to Hindu temples, particularly dedicated to the Shiva and later to Krishna. The designs of these theatres usually matched the dimensions and architecture recommended as ""ideal"" in the ancient Natya Shastra, and some of them could house 500 viewers.
Krishnanattam is the likely immediate precursor of  Kathakali, states Zarrilli. Krishnanattam is dance-drama art form about the life and activities of Hindu god Krishna, that developed under the sponsorship of Sri Manavedan Raja, the ruler of Calicut (1585-1658 AD). The traditional legend states that Kottarakkara Thampuran (also known as Vira Kerala Varma) requested the services of a Krishnanattam troupe, but his request was denied. So Kottarakkara Thampuran created another art form based on Krishnanattam, called it Ramanattam because the early plays were based on the Hindu epic Ramayana, which over time diversified beyond Ramayana and became popular as 'Kathakali'.
Another related performance art is Ashtapadiyattom, a dance drama based on the Gita Govinda of the twelfth-century poet Jayadeva, told the story of Krishna embodied as a humble cowherd, his consort Radha, and three cow girls. Kathakali also incorporates several elements from other traditional and ritualistic art forms like Mudiyettu, Theyyam and Padayani besides folk arts such as Porattu Nadakam that shares ideas with the Tamil Therukoothu tradition. The south Indian martial art of Kalarippayattu has also influenced Kathakali.
Despite the links,  Kathakali is different from temple-driven arts such as ""Krishnanattam"", Kutiyattam and others because unlike the older arts where the dancer-actor also had to be the vocal artist, Kathakali separated these roles allowing the dancer-actor to excel in and focus on choreography while the vocal artists focused on delivering their lines. Kathakali also expanded the performance repertoire, style and standardized the costume making it easier for the audience to understand the various performances and new plays.
Kathakali is structured around plays called Attakatha (literally, ""enacted story""), written in Sanskritized Malayalam. These plays are written in a particular format that helps identify the ""action"" and the ""dialogue"" parts of the performance. The Sloka part is the metrical verse, written in third person – often entirely in Sanskrit - describing the action part of the choreography. The Pada part contains the dialogue part. These Attakatha texts grant considerable flexibility to the actors to improvise. Historically, all these plays were derived from Hindu texts such as the Ramayana, the Mahabharata and the Bhagavata Purana.
A Kathakali repertoire is an operatic performance where an ancient story is playfully dramatized. Traditionally, a Kathakali performance is long, starting at dusk and continuing through dawn, with interludes and breaks for the performers and audience. Some plays continued over several nights, starting at dusk every day. Modern performances are shorter. The stage with seating typically in open grounds outside a temple, but in some places, special theatres called Kuttampalam built inside the temple compounds have been in use.
The stage is mostly bare, or with a few drama-related items. One item, called a Kalivilakku (kali meaning dance; vilakku meaning lamp), can be traced back to Kutiyattam. In both traditions, the performance happens in the front of a huge Kalivilakku with its thick wick sunk in coconut oil, burning with a yellow light. Traditionally, before the advent of electricity, this special large lamp provided light during the night. As the play progressed, the actor-dancers would gather around this lamp so that the audience could see what they are expressing.
The performance involves actor-dancers in the front, supported by musicians in the background stage on right (audience's left) and with vocalists in the front of the stage (historically so they could be heard by the audience before the age of microphone and speakers).[note 2] Typically, all roles are played by male actor-dancers, though in modern performances, women have been welcomed into the Kathakali tradition.
Of all classical Indian dances, Kathakali has the most elaborate costuming consisting of head dresses, face masks and vividly painted faces. It typically takes several evening hours to prepare a Kathakali troupe to get ready for a play. Costumes have made Kathakali's popularity extend beyond adults, with children absorbed by the colors, makeup, lights and sounds of the performances.
The makeup follows an accepted code, that helps the audience easily identify the archetypal characters such as gods, goddesses, demons, demonesses, saints, animals and characters of a story. Seven basic makeup types are used in Kathakali, namely Pachcha (green), Pazhuppu (ripe), Kathi, Kari, Thaadi, Minukku and Teppu (red). These vary with the styles and the predominant colours made from rice paste and vegetable colors that are applied on the face. Pachcha (green) with lips painted brilliant coral red portrays noble characters and sages such as Krishna, Vishnu, Rama, Yudhishthira, Arjuna, Nala and philosopher-kings.
Thaadi (red) is the code for someone with an evil streak such as Dushasana and Hiranyakashipu. Some characters have a green face (representing heroic or excellence as a warrior) with red dots or lines on their cheeks or red-coloured moustache or red-streaked beard (representing evil inner nature), while others have a full face and beard  while others have a full face and beard coloured red, the latter implying excessively evil characters.
Kari (black) is the code for forest dwellers, hunters, and middle ground character. Demonesses and treacherous characters are also painted black but with streaks or patches of red.
Yellow is the code for monks, mendicants, and women. Minukka (radiant, shining) with a warm yellow, orange or saffron typifies noble, virtuous feminine characters such as Sita, Panchali and Mohini. Men who act the roles of women also add a false top knot to their left and decorate it in a style common to the region. Vella Thadi (white beard) represents a divine being, someone with virtuous inner state and consciousness such as Hanuman. Teppu is for special characters found in Hindu mythologies, such as Garuda, Jatayu and Hamsa who act as messengers or carriers, but do not fit the other categories. Face masks and headgear is added to accentuate the inner nature of the characters. The garments colours have a similar community accepted code of silent communication.
The character types, states Zarrilli, reflect the Guṇa theory of personalities in the ancient Samkhya school of Hindu philosophy. There are three Guṇas, according to this philosophy, that have always been and continue to be present in all things and beings in the world. These three Guṇas are sattva (goodness, constructive, harmonious, virtuous), rajas (passion, aimless action, dynamic, egoistic), and tamas (darkness, destructive, chaotic, viciousness). All of these three gunas (good, evil, active) are present in everyone and everything, it is the proportion that is different, according to the Hindu worldview. The interplay of these gunas defines the character of someone or something, and the costumes and face colouring in Kathakali often combines the various colour codes to give complexity and depth to the actor-dancers.
Like many classical Indian arts, Kathakali is choreography as much as it is acting. It is said to be one of the most difficult styles to execute on stage, with young artists preparing for their roles for several years before they get a chance to do it on stage. The actors speak a ""sign language"", where the word part of the character's dialogue is expressed through ""hand signs (mudras)"", while emotions and mood is expressed through ""facial and eye"" movements. In parallel, vocalists in the background sing rhythmically the play, matching the beats of the orchestra playing, thus unifying the ensemble into a resonant oneness.
Several ancient Sanskrit texts such as Natya Shastra and Hastha Lakshanadeepika discuss hand gestures or mudras. Kathakali follows the Hastha Lakshanadeepika most closely, unlike other classical dances of India.
There are 24 main mudras, and numerous more minor ones in Kathakali. There are nine facial expressions called Navarasas, which each actor masters through facial muscle control during his education, in order to express the emotional state of the character in the play. The theory behind the Navarasas is provided by classical Sanskrit texts such as Natya Shastra, but sometimes with different names, and these are found in other classical Indian dances as well. The Navarasas express nine bhava-s (emotions) in Kathakali as follows:
A Kathakali performance typically starts with artists tuning their instruments and warming up with beats, signalling to the arriving audience that the artists are getting ready and the preparations are on. The repertoire includes a series of performances. First comes the Thodayam and Purappadu performances, which are preliminary 'pure' (abstract) dances that emphasize skill and pure motion. Thodayam is performed behind a curtain and without all the costumes, while Purappadu is performed without the curtain and in full costumes.
The expressive part of the performance, which constitutes the dance-drama, is split into four types: Kalasham (major and most common), Iratti (special, used with battles-related Chempata rhythm),  Thonkaram (similar to Iratti but different music), and Nalamiratti (used for exits or link between the chapters of the play).
The entrance of characters onto the  Kathakali stage can be varied. Many of these ways are not found in other major Indian classical dance traditions.  Kathakali employs several methods:
The play is in the form of verses that are metered and lyrical, sung by vocalists whose voice has been trained to various melodies (ragas), music and synchronized with the dance-acting on the stage. The vocalists not only deliver the lines, but help set the context and express the inner state of the character by modulating their voice. For example, anger is expressed by the use of sharp high voice and pleading is expressed by the use of a sad tone.
Music is central to a Kathakali performance. It sets the mood and triggers emotions resonant with the nature of the scene. It also sets the rhythm to which the actor-dancers perform the choreography and scenes. Some major musical patterns, according to Clifford and Betty, that go with the moods and content of the scene are: Chempada (most common and default that applies to a range of moods, in battles and fights between good and evil, also to conclude a scene); Chempa music (depict tension, dispute, disagreement between lovers or competing ideas); Panchari (for odious, preparatory such as sharpening a sword); Triputa (thought-provoking, scenes involving sages and teachers); Adantha (scenes involving kings or divine beings); Muri Adantha musical style (for comic, light-hearted, or fast-moving scenes involving heroic or anger-driven activity).
Many musical instruments are used in Kathakali. Three major drums found are Maddalam(barrel-shaped), Chenda (cylindrical drum played with curved sticks) and Idakka  (Idakka, hourglass-shaped drum with muted and melodious notes played when female characters perform).
Over five hundred  Kathakali plays (Aattakatha) exist, most of which were written before the 20th century. Of these, about four dozen are most actively performed. These plays are sophisticated literary works, states Zarrilli, and only five authors have written more than two plays. The late 17th century Unnayi Variyar, in his short life, produced four plays which are traditionally considered the most expressive of the Kathakali playwrights. Typically, his four plays are performed on four nights, and they relate to the mythical Hindu love story of Nala and Damayanti. The Nala-Damayanti story has roots in the texts of 1st millennium BCE and is found in the Mahabharata, but the Kathakali play version develops the characters, their inner states, the emotions and their circumstances far more than the older texts.
A tradition  Kathakali play typically consists of two interconnected parts, the third-person Shlokas and first-person Padams. The Shlokas are in Sanskrit and describe the action in the scene, while Padams are dialogues in Malayalam (Sanskritized) for the actors to interpret and play. A Padam consists of three parts: a Pallavi (refrain), Anupallavi (subrefrain) and Charanam (foot), all of which are set to one of the ancient Ragas (musical mode), based on the mood and context as outlined in ancient Sanskrit texts such as the Natya Shastra. In historic practice of a play performance, each Padam was enacted twice by the actor while the vocalists sang the lines repeatedly as the actor-dancer played his role out.
The traditional plays were long, many written to be performed all night, some such as those based on the Ramayana and the Mahabharata written to be performed for many sequential nights. However, others such as the Prahlada Charitham have been composed so that they can be performed within four hours. Modern productions have extracted parts of these legendary plays, to be typically performed within 3 to 4 hours.
Kathakali is still practiced in its Traditional  ways and there are experimental plays based on European classics and Shakespeare's plays. Recent productions have adapted stories from other cultures and mythologies, such as those of Miguel de Cervantes, Johann Wolfgang von Goethe and William Shakespeare.
Kathakali has lineages or distinctive schools of play interpretation and dance performance called Sampradayam. These developed in part because of the gurukula system of transmission from one generation to the next. By the 19th-century, many such styles were in vogue in Kerala, of which two major styles have crystallized and survived into the modern age.
The Kidangoor style is one of the two, that developed in Travancore, and it is strongly influenced by Kutiyattam, while also drawing elements of Ramanattam and Kalladikkotan. It is traditionally attributed to Nalanunni, under the patronage of Utram Tirunal Maharaja (1815-1861).
The Kalluvazhi style is second of the two, which developed in Palakkad (Olappamanna Mana) in central Kerala, and it is a synthesis of the older Kaplingadan and Kalladikkotan performance arts. It is traditionally attributed to Unniri Panikkar, in a Brahmin household (~1850), and became the dominant style established in Kerala Kalamandalam – a school of performance arts.
Kathakali has traditionally been an art that has continued from one generation to the next through a guru-disciples (gurukkula) based training system. Artist families tended to pick promising talent from within their own extended families, sometimes from outside the family, and the new budding artist typically stayed with his guru as a student and treated like a member of the family. The guru provided both the theoretical and practical training to the student, and the disciple would accompany the guru to formal performances. In modern times, professional schools train students of Kathakali, with some such as those in Trivandrum Margi school emphasizing a single teacher for various courses, while others such as the Kerala Kalamandalam school wherein students learn subjects from different teachers. Kathakali schools are now found all over India, as well as in parts of Western Europe and the United States.
A typical  Kathakali training centre auditions for students, examining health and physical fitness necessary for the aerobic and active stage performance, the body flexibility, sense of rhythm and an interview to gauge how sincere the student is in performance arts. A typical course work in Kathakali emphasizes physical conditioning and daily exercises, yoga and body massage to tone the muscles and sculpt the growing body, along with studies and dance practice. Per ancient Indian tradition, young students continue to start their year by giving symbolic gifts to the guru, such as a few coins with betel leaves, while the teacher gives the student a loincloth, a welcome and blessings.
Kathakali is still hugely male-dominated, but since the 1970s, women have made entry into the art form on a recognisable scale. The central Kerala temple town of Tripunithura has a ladies' troupe (Tripunithura Kathakali Kendram Ladies Troupe) who perform Kathakali. The troupe won a national award, i.e. Nari Shakti Puraskar, for their work.
The theory and foundations of  Kathakali are same as other major classical Indian dances, traceable to Sanskrit texts such as the Natya Shastra, but the expression style in each is very different and distinctive. Kathakali is different from a similar-sounding Kathak, though both are Indian classical dance traditions of ""story play"" wherein the stories have been traditionally derived from the Hindu epics and the Puranas. Kathak is an ancient performance art that emerged in North India, with roots in traveling bards retelling mythical and spiritual stories through dance-acting. Kathak traditionally has included female actor-dancers, unlike Kathakali which has traditionally been performed by an all-male troupe. Kathak deploys much simpler costumes, makeup and no face masks. Both dance forms employ choreography, face and hand gestures traceable to the Natya Shastra, but Kathak generally moves around a straight leg and torso movements, with no martial art leaps and jumps like Kathakali. Kathak uses the stage space more, and does not typically include separate vocalists. Both deploy a host of similar traditional Indian musical instruments.
Kathakali-style, costume rich, musical drama are found in other cultures. For example, the Japanese Noh (能) integrates masks, costumes and various props in a dance-based performance, requiring highly trained actors and musicians. Emotions are primarily conveyed by stylized gestures while the costumes communicate the nature of the characters in a Noh performance, as in Kathakali. In both, costumed men have traditionally performed all the roles including those of women in the play. The training regimen and initiation of the dance-actors in both cultures have many similarities.
Kabuki, another Japanese art form, has similarities to Kathakali. Jīngjù, a Chinese art of dance-acting (zuo), like Kathakali presents artists with elaborate masks, costumes and colorfully painted faces. Balinese dance as well as tibetan art forms also shares similarities.
Media related to Kathakali at Wikimedia Commons
This article contains s of Monuments of National Importance in India.
An Archaeological Sites and Remains Act, 1958 defines an ""Ancient Monument"" as follows: 
Ancient Monument means any structure, erection or monument, or any tumulus or place of interment, or any cave, rock-sculpture, inscription or monolith which is of historical, archaeological or artistic interest and which has been in existence for not less than 100 years
A ""Monument of National Importance"" is designated by the Archaeological Survey of India and includes the following: The remains of an ancient monument
The site of an ancient monument
The land on which there are fences or protective covering structures for preserving the monument
Land by means of which people can freely access the monument
The Monuments of National Importance are designated by the Archaeological Survey of India (ASI). The union government of India is authorised to maintain, protect and promote the Monuments of National Importance.

Monuments of National Importance designated by the ASI
States No. of Monuments
Andhra Pradesh 129
Arunachal Pradesh 5
Assam 55
Bihar 70
Chhattisgarh 47
Goa 21
Gujarat 203
Haryana 90
Himachal Pradesh 43
Jharkhand 12
Karnataka 506
Kerala 26
Madhya Pradesh 292
Maharashtra 285
Manipur 1
Meghalaya 8
Mizoram 8
Nagaland 4
Odisha 78
Punjab 33
Rajasthan 163
Sikkim 3
Tamil Nadu 413
Telangana 8
Tripura 8
Uttar Pradesh 741
Uttarakhand 44
West Bengal 133

Union territories No. of Monuments
Andaman and Nicobar Islands – 0
Chandigarh – 0
Dadra and Nagar Haveli and Daman and Diu 12
Delhi 174
Jammu and Kashmir 56
Ladakh 13
Lakshadweep – 0
Puducherry – 0
Total: 3,684 monuments are there in India
The United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO) designates World Heritage Sites of outstanding universal value to cultural or natural heritage which have been nominated by countries which are signatories to the UNESCO World Heritage Convention, established in 1972. Cultural heritage consists of monuments (such as architectural works, monumental sculptures, or inscriptions), groups of buildings, and sites (including archaeological sites). Natural features (consisting of physical and biological formations), geological and physiographical formations (including habitats of threatened species of animals and plants), and natural sites which are important from the point of view of science, conservation or natural beauty, are defined as natural heritage. India accepted the convention on 14 November 1977, making its sites eligible for inclusion on the list.
There are 42 World Heritage Sites in India. Out of these, 34 are cultural, seven are natural, and one, Khangchendzonga National Park, is of mixed type. India has the sixth-most sites worldwide. The first sites to be ed were the Ajanta Caves, Ellora Caves, Agra Fort, and Taj Mahal, all of which were inscribed in the 1983 session of the World Heritage Committee. The most recent sites ed were Santiniketan and the Sacred Ensembles of the Hoysalas, in 2023. At different times, two sites were ed as endangered: the Manas Wildlife Sanctuary was ed between 1992 and 2011 due to poaching and the activities of Bodo militias, and the monuments at Hampi were ed between 1999 and 2006 due to risks from increased traffic and new constructions in surroundings. One site is transnational: The Architectural Work of Le Corbusier is shared with six other countries. In addition, India has 57 sites on its tentative list.
UNESCO lists sites under ten criteria; each entry must meet at least one of the criteria. Criteria i through vi are cultural, and vii through x are natural.
Ajanta Caves, Cave with carved columns and a shrine in the middle Maharashtra 1983 242; (cultural) The caves at Ajanta represent a collection of Buddhist art from two periods. The first monuments date to the 2nd and 1st centuries BCE and were created by the followers of Theravada Buddhism. Further monuments were added in the 5th and 6th centuries CE, during the Vakataka dynasty, by the followers of Mahayana Buddhism. The monuments are masterpieces of Buddhist art and exerted strong artistic influence in India and the broader region, especially in Java.
Ellora Caves Tourists visiting a temple cut in rock Maharashtra 1983 243; (cultural) The Ellora Caves comprise 34 temples and monasteries that were cut into a 2 km (1.2 mi) long basalt cliff between the 7th and 11th centuries. As they were built by followers of Buddhism, Hinduism, and Jainism, they illustrate the religious tolerance of the period when they were constructed. The largest temple is the Kailasa Temple (pictured), which is elaborately decorated with sculptures and paintings.gra Fort Building in red stone with decorations Uttar Pradesh 1983 251; iii (cultural) Agra Fort is a 16th-century Mughal imperial fortress in Agra. It got its present layout under the Emperor Akbar. The complex contains several palaces (Jahangiri Mahal pictured), audience halls, and two mosques. Stylistically, it is one of the high points of Indo-Islamic architecture, with influences of Persian and Timurid architecture.Taj Mahal Taj Mahal, a domed building in white marble with four surrounding minarets Uttar Pradesh 1983 252; i (cultural) The Taj Mahal is considered the finest example of Indo-Islamic architecture. It was built in Agra on the bank of the Yamuna river as a mausoleum of Mumtaz Mahal, the Persian wife of the Mughal emperor Shah Jahan, between 1631 and 1648. It was designed by Ustad Ahmad Lahori and built in white marble inlaid with precious and semi-precious stones. The tomb is surrounded by four free-standing minarets. The complex also includes the main gate, a mosque, a guesthouse, and surrounding gardens.Sun Temple, Konârak A large Hindu temple in stone Odisha 1984 246; (cultural) This Hindu temple was built in the 13th century and is one of the finest examples of Kalinga architecture. It represents the chariot of the solar deity Surya: on the outer sides, it has 24 wheels carved of stone and richly decorated, being pulled by six horses. Other decorative motifs include lions, musicians, dancers, and erotic scenes.Group of Monuments at Mahabalipuram A Hindu temple in stone Tamil Nadu 1984 249; (cultural) The monuments around the town of Mamallapuram were built in the 7th and 8th centuries, under the Pallava dynasty. There are different types of monuments: the rathas, which are chariot-shaped temples (Dharmaraja Ratha); the mandapas (rock-cut temples); rock reliefs, including the giant Descent of the Ganges; Shore Temple (pictured) and other temples and archaeological remains. The artistic expression of the monuments was influential in the broader region, including Cambodia, Vietnam, and Java.Kaziranga National Park A rhino at a water edge Assam 1985 337; ix, x (natural) Kaziranga is located in the floodplains of the Brahmaputra River. It is one of the best wildlife sanctuaries in the world, home to the world's largest population of the Indian rhinoceros (pictured), as well as tigers, Asian elephants, wild water buffalo, and the Ganges river dolphin. The wetlands are important for migratory bird species.Manas Wildlife Sanctuary A herd of Wild elephants in the park Assam 1985 338; vii, ix, x (natural) The sanctuary along the Manas River covers grasslands on floodplains and forests, both in lowlands and in hills. The area is a biodiversity hotspot and home to several endangered species, including the Indian rhinoceros, Asian elephant (pictured), wild water buffalo, tiger, sloth bear, pygmy hog, Gee's golden langur, and Bengal florican. The forests are constantly being renewed after floods and changes in the river courses. Between 1992 and 2011, the site was listed as endangered due to poaching and the activities of Bodo militias.eoladeo National Park A group of Bar Headed Geese and Demoiselle cranes flying together in the Sanctuary Rajasthan 1985 340; x (natural) Initially a duck-hunting reserve for Maharajas, Keoladeo is a man-made and man-maintained wetland. It is important both for migratory and resident birds, especially waterbirds. Over 350 species of birds have been recorded, including 15 species of herons, the Siberian crane, and the greater spotted eagle. Pictured here is a group of bar-headed geese and demoiselle cranes flying together in the park. The park is also protected under the Ramsar Convention.Churches and Convents of Goa A church in red brick and an adjacent building in white Goa 1986 234; ii, iv, vi (cultural) Old Goa was the capital of Portuguese India, a colony that lasted for 450 years until 1961. The site comprises seven churches and convents that were built in the 16th and 17th centuries in the Gothic, Manueline, Mannerist, and Baroque styles, but which were also adapted to suit local techniques and resources. They spread architectural influences to Asian countries where Catholic missions were established. The Basilica of Bom Jesus, where Saint Francis Xavier is buried, is pictured.Khajuraho Group of Monuments Stone carvings representing people in different situations Madhya Pradesh 1986 240; i, iii (cultural) This site comprises 23 temples, both Hindu and Jain, that were built in the 10th and 11th centuries, during the Chandela dynasty. The temples are built in the Nagara style. They are richly decorated with stone carvings and sculptures that depict sacred and secular motifs, including depictions of domestic life, musicians, dancers, and amorous couples. A detail from the Lakshmana Temple is pictured.Group of Monuments at Hampi A stone chariot in Dravidian style in Hampi Karnataka 1986 241bis; i, iii, iv (cultural) Hampi was the capital of the Vijayanagara Empire until its abandonment after its sacking and pillaging by the Deccan sultanates in 1565. For about 200 years, it was a prosperous multi-cultural city that left several monuments in the Dravidian style as well as the Indo-Islamic style. The remains include religious and secular buildings and defensive structures. The Vitthala Temple is pictured. A minor boundary modification of the site took place in 2012. Between 1999 and 2006, the site was listed as endangered due to risks posed by increased traffic and new constructions.atehpur Sikri A large gate in red stone in Mughal style Uttar Pradesh 1986 255; ii, iii, iv (cultural) For about a decade in the second half of the 16th century, Fatehpur Sikri was the capital of the Mughal Empire under Emperor Akbar, until the capital was moved to Lahore in 1585 and the city was mostly abandoned. The site comprises a large collection of monuments and temples in the Mughal style, such as the Jama Masjid (the gate to the mosque, the Buland Darwaza, pictured), the Panch Mahal palace, and the Tomb of Salim Chishti.Group of Monuments at Pattadakal A Hindu temple in light-coloured stone Karnataka 1987 239rev; iii, iv (cultural) This site comprises nine Hindu temples and one Jain temple that were built in the 7th and 8th centuries under the Chalukya dynasty. They were constructed in the Badami Chalukya style that blends influences from northern and southern India. The Temple of Virupaksha is pictured.Elephanta Caves Stone carvings representing Shiva and religious scenes Maharashtra 1987 244rev; i, iii (cultural) The cave complex, located on Elephanta Island in Mumbai Harbour, was constructed mainly in the 5th and 6th centuries, with remains of human occupation dating back to the 2nd century BCE. The temples are dedicated to Shiva. The caves are decorated with stone carvings, some of them colossal. A statue of Trimurti Shiva, flanked by the dvarapalas, is pictured.Great Living Chola Temples Tamil Nadu 1987 250bis; ii, iii (cultural) This site comprises three Hindu temples built in the 11th and 12th centuries under the Chola dynasty. They represent some of the best examples of Dravidian architecture of the Chola period. They are made of stone and decorated with stone and bronze sculptures. Initially, only the Brihadisvara Temple (pictured) was listed as a World Heritage Site; two other temples, the Brihadisvara Temple and the Airavatesvara Temple were added in 2004, after which the site was renamed to its current name.Sundarbans National Park A tiger at the water margin West Bengal 1987 452; ix, x (natural) The national park covers the Indian part of the Sundarbans, the delta of the Ganges and Brahmaputra rivers. It is the world's largest and richest mangrove forest, with about 78 recorded mangrove species. It is a biodiversity hotspot, home to a large population of Bengal tigers (one pictured), as well as an important habitat for the Irrawaddy dolphin and Ganges river dolphin, several species of birds and sea turtles. In Bangladesh, the Sundarbans is listed as a separate World Heritage Site.Nanda Devi and Valley of Flowers National Parks Flowers in a mountain valley Uttarakhand 1988 335bis; viii, x (natural) This site comprises two areas in the West Himalayas, the Valley of Flowers National Park (pictured) and the Nanda Devi National Park. There are different types of high-altitude habitats, from high mountain peaks (Nanda Devi at 7,817 m (25,646 ft) is India's second-highest mountain) to alpine meadows. In addition to numerous mountain plant species, the area is home to the Asiatic black bear, snow leopard, brown bear, and bharal. Nanda Devi NP was originally listed alone in 1988; the Valley of Flowers NP was added in 2005.Buddhist Monuments at Sanchi A large stupa in stone with an elaborate gate in front Madhya Pradesh 1989 524; i, ii, iii, iv, vi (cultural) Sanchi is one of the oldest extant Buddhist sanctuaries and was instrumental in the spread of the religion through the Indian subcontinent. It became important under Emperor Ashoka of the Maurya Empire in the 3rd century BCE. The remains of a pillar from the period are preserved. Stupas (Stupa 1 pictured), palaces, temples, and monasteries are preserved in different states of conservation, mostly dating to the 2nd and 1st centuries BCE. The city declined in importance in the 12th century.Humayun's Tomb, Delhi Look at a mausoleum in white and red stone through a gate Delhi 1993 232bis; ii, iv (cultural) The tomb of the Mughal emperor Humayun was constructed in the 1560s and represents the first example of a garden tomb on the Indian subcontinent, introducing the elements of Persian gardens. The monumental double-domed mausoleum represents a leap in Mughal architecture and is an architectural predecessor of the Taj Mahal. The complex includes several smaller tombs from the period. A minor boundary modification took place in 2016.Qutb Minar and its Monuments, Delhi A tall minaret and a mausoleum, both in red and white stone Delhi 1993 233; iv (cultural) The complex comprises several early Islamic India monuments from the 13th and 14th centuries when the Delhi Sultanate established power there. They include the Qutb Minar, a 72.5 m (238 ft)-high minaret (pictured), the Alai Darwaza gateway, the Quwwat-ul-Islam Mosque where several stone pillars from previous Hindu temples were repurposed, the Iron pillar, and several tombs and other monuments.Mountain Railways of India A train crossing a bridge with several arches West Bengal, Tamil Nadu, Himachal Pradesh 1999 944ter; ii, iv (cultural) This site comprises three mountain railways built in the late 19th and early 20th centuries to provide access to towns in the highlands. They represent a technology transfer in a colonial setting; the construction involved building bridges and tunnels to cross difficult terrains. The railways supported further human settlement of the areas they linked to and are still fully operational. The Darjeeling Himalayan Railway was initially listed alone in 1999. The Nilgiri Mountain Railway was added in 2005, and the Kalka–Shimla railway (pictured) in 2008.Mahabodhi Temple Complex at Bodh Gaya A large stone Buddhist temple Bihar 2002 1056rev; i, ii, iii, iv, vi (cultural) The Buddhist temple complex marks the site where Buddha is said to have attained enlightenment under the Bodhi Tree. The present temple dates to the 5th and 6th centuries CE (during the Gupta period) and was built upon a previous structure commissioned by Emperor Ashoka in the 3rd century BCE. The temple is 50 m (160 ft) high and made of brick. It had a substantial influence on the development of architecture in the following centuries. After centuries of abandonment and neglect, the temple was extensively restored in the 19th century.Rock Shelters of Bhimbetka Rock paintings depicting people and animals Madhya Pradesh 2003 925; iii, v (cultural) This site comprises five clusters of rock shelters in the foothills of the Vindhya Range. They contain rock paintings from the hunter-gatherer societies of the Mesolithic to the historical period. The nearby villages still maintain some cultural practices similar to those depicted in the paintings.Chhatrapati Shivaji Terminus (formerly Victoria Terminus) A large heavily decorated railway station building Maharashtra 2004 945rev; ii, iv (cultural) The historic terminal train station in Mumbai was built in the late 19th century. It was designed by Frederick William Stevens in the Victorian Gothic style, drawing influences from Italian Gothic architecture and combining them with influences from Indian traditional buildings. It symbolized the wealth of Mumbai as a major commercial port within the British Commonwealth.Champaner-Pavagadh Archaeological Park A mosque in brown stone Gujarat 2004 1101; ii, iv, v, vi (cultural) The site contains remains from several periods, from the Chalcolithic to the remains of Champaner, a short-lived capital of the Gujarat Sultanate in the 16th century. Important buildings include the Hindu temple Kalika Mata, Jain temples, and Jama Mosque (pictured) which features both Hindu and Muslim architectural elements, and the remains of water-managing systems, fortifications, and 14th-century temples.Red Fort Complex Fortress walls and a gate in red stone Delhi 2007 231rev;  (cultural) The Red Fort was built under Mughal emperor Shah Jahan in the mid-17th century. It represents the zenith of Mughal architecture, blending the elements of Indo-Persian culture with Timurid elements. Its architecture had a strong influence on later palaces and gardens in the region. The Red Fort was also the setting of historical events; it was sacked and partially repurposed by the British, and it was the site where the independence of India was first celebrated. The Delhi Gate is pictured.The Jantar Mantar, Jaipur A collection of buildings for astronomical purposes Rajasthan 2010 1338; iii, vi (cultural) The Jantar Mantar in Jaipur is India's most significant historic astronomical observatory. It dates from the early 18th century and was built by Rajput king Sawai Jai Singh. There are about 20 astronomical instruments that were designed and built for naked eye observations of the positions of stars and planets. It also served as a meeting point for different scientific cultures.Western Ghats A scenic view of Pampadumshola Mountains Maharashtra, Karnataka, Kerala, Tamil Nadu 2012 1342rev; ix, x (natural) The Western Ghats is a mountain range that runs along the western coast of the Indian subcontinent. It is covered with montane forests. The area is a biodiversity hotspot and home to endangered species such as the Bengal tiger, lion-tailed macaque, Nilgiri tahr, and Nilgiri langur. In terms of evolutionary history, the area is important given the breakup of Gondwana in the early Jurassic period, after which India was an isolated landmass until its collision with the Eurasian Plate. The World Heritage Site comprises 39 individual properties.Hill Forts of Rajasthan A fortress in light-coloured stone above a river Rajasthan 2013 247rev; ii, iii (cultural) This site comprises six forts: the Chittor Fort, Kumbhalgarh Fort, Ranthambore Fort, Gagron Fort, Amber Fort (pictured), and Jaisalmer Fort, which were constructed between the 8th and 18th centuries by Rajput kingdoms. They are eclectic in style, with elements of Sultanate and Mughal architecture, and were influential on the later styles of the Maratha Empire. They are situated in different settings; for example, Ranthambore is in a forest, and Jaisalmer is in a desert.Rani-ki-Vav (the Queen's Stepwell) at Patan, Gujarat A view of the stepwell with several decorated pillars Gujarat 2014 922; i, iv (cultural) Rani-ki-Vav is one of the finest examples of a stepwell, an elaborate type of well where groundwater is accessed through several levels of stairs. It was constructed in the 11th century, during the Chaulukya dynasty, on the banks of the Saraswati River in the city of Patan. It has seven levels, each decorated with stone carvings and sculptures depicting religious and secular themes and literary works. After the change in the river course in the 13th century, it was no longer in use and got covered with silt, which allowed for its preservation.Great Himalayan National Park Conservation Area Snow-covered mountains and trees Himachal Pradesh 2014 1406rev; x (natural) The national park covers habitats from alpine peaks of the Himalayas above 6,000 m (20,000 ft) to alpine meadows and riverine forests below 2,000 m (6,600 ft). In total, there are 25 types of forests recorded, and they have rich floral and faunal assemblies, including numerous species of birds, mammals, reptiles, and insects. It is home to endangered species such as the western tragopan and musk deer.Archaeological Site of Nalanda Mahavihara at Nalanda, Bihar Ruins of brick buildings Bihar 2016 1502; iv, vi (cultural) Nalanda Mahavihara was a Buddhist ancient higher-learning institution established in the 5th century and lasting until its sacking in the 13th century. However, some archaeological remains also date back to the 3rd century BCE. The remains include shrines and stupas, viharas (residential and educational buildings), and artworks in different materials. Both the architectural solutions and educational approaches were influential in other similar institutions in the broader region.Khangchendzonga National Park Snow-covered mountains and a lake in front Sikkim 2016 1513; iii, vi, vii, x (mixed) The national park is located around Mount Khangchendzonga, the world's third highest mountain (8,586 m (28,169 ft)). It is a sacred mountain in Tibetan Buddhism, where the area is considered a beyul, a sacred hidden land. It is home to ethnically very diverse Sikkimese communities. From the natural perspective, the area comprises various habitats, from high mountains with glaciers to old-growth forests, and is rich in animal and plant species.The Architectural Work of Le Corbusier, an Outstanding Contribution to the Modern Movement* A modernist concrete building, a pond in front Chandigarh 2016 1321rev; i, ii, vi (cultural) This transnational site (shared with Argentina, Belgium, France, Germany, Switzerland, and Japan) encompasses 17 works of Franco-Swiss architect Le Corbusier. Le Corbusier was an important representative of the 20th-century Modernist movement, which introduced new architectural techniques to meet the needs of the changing society. The Chandigarh Capitol Complex is listed in India. It is the central part of the city of Chandigarh and is designed in line with the principles of a radiant city. The Palace of Assembly is pictured.istoric City of Ahmadabad An intricately carved Jali Design on Sidi Saiyyed Mosque Gujarat 2017 1551; ii, v (cultural) The city of Ahmedabad was founded by Ahmad Shah I in 1411 to serve as the capital of the Gujarat Sultanate. It was the meeting place of many religions (Hinduism, Islam, Buddhism, Jainism, Christianity, Zoroastrianism, and Judaism), which resulted in a unique urban fabric. The architecture is based on timber, and the typical neighbourhoods are called pols, densely packed traditional houses with gated streets. Important buildings from the Sultanate period include the Bhadra Fort city walls, Sidi Saiyyed Mosque (pictured) and numerous mosques, tombs, and shrines.Victorian Gothic and Art Deco Ensembles of Mumbai A brick building in neo-gothic style Maharashtra 2018 1480; ii, iv (cultural) This site comprises two assemblies of buildings in Mumbai from the British Empire era. Public buildings in the Victorian Gothic style from the second half of the 19th century adapted Gothic Revival elements for the Indian climate, introducing features such as balconies and verandas. The Bombay High Court building is pictured. The Art Deco buildings date to the early 20th century and include cinema halls and apartment buildings. See also Art Deco in Mumbai.Jaipur City, Rajasthan A large palace in red and pink sandstone with many windows Rajasthan 2019 1605; ii, iv, vi (cultural) Jaipur was founded by the Rajput ruler Jai Singh II in 1727. The city was built with a grid plan, inspired by ancient Hindu and Western ideals, in a departure from the medieval architecture of the region. It was a strong trade centre and home to craftsmen and artists. Important buildings and sites include the Hawa Mahal palace (pictured), Govind Dev Ji Temple, City Palace, and Jantar Mantar, which is listed as a separate World Heritage Site.Kakatiya Rudreshwara (Ramappa) Temple, Telangana A Hindu temple in red stone Telangana 2021 1570; i, iii (cultural) The Hindu temple, dedicated to Shiva, was constructed in the first half of the 13th century under the Kakatiya dynasty. It is decorated with stone carvings and sculptures in granite and dolerite that depict regional dance customs. In line with Hindu practices, the temple is constructed in a way that blends harmonically with the environment.Dholavira: a Harappan City Archaeological site with some brick and stone walls Gujarat 2021 1645; iii, iv (cultural) Dholavira was one of the centres of the Harappan Civilisation from the 3rd to mid-2nd millennium BCE, in the Bronze Age. The remains include a walled city and a cemetery, and there are remains of buildings and water management systems. The city's location was chosen because of nearby sources of precious minerals. The city had trade connections with other cities in the region and as far as Mesopotamia. The site was rediscovered in 1968.Santiniketan A building with elaborate facade behind a metal fence West Bengal 2023 1375; iv, vi (cultural) Santiniketan was founded as an ashram by Debendranath Tagore in the second half of the 19th century and then developed into a university town for Visva-Bharati University. It is connected to the life and philosophy of Debendranath's son Rabindranath Tagore, the leading figure of the Bengali Renaissance. The prayer hall is pictured.Sacred Ensembles of the Hoysalas Hindu temple in Dravidian style Karnataka 2023 1670; i, ii, iv (cultural) Three Hoysala temples - the Chennakeshava Temple in Belur, the Hoysaleswara Temple in Halebidu and the Keshava temple (pictured) in Somanathapura, dating between the 12th and 14th centuries. Hoysala architecture combined the elements of Dravidian architecture with influences from northern India. The temples were built by the followers of Vaishnavism and Shaivism and they are richly decorated with stone sculptures and carvings. The Chennakeshava Temple in Belur is still an important pilgrimage site.
In addition to sites inscribed on the World Heritage , member states can maintain a of tentative sites that they may consider for nomination. Nominations for the World Heritage are only accepted if the site was previously ed on the tentative . India s 57 properties on its tentative ."
Temples at Bishnupur, West Bengal A brick temple with a domed roof West Bengal 1998 (cultural) The terracotta temples built by Malla rulers date to the 17th century. They were built in brick and laterite stone. They have characteristic sloping roofs. The Jor Bangle temple, from 1655, is pictured.Mattancherry Palace, Ernakulam, Kerala A building with cars parked in front Kerala 1998 (cultural) The palace was built by the Portuguese for the local rulers around 1555. It is a two-storey building with several halls and a ceiling decorated with carvings in the coronation hall.Group of Monuments at Mandu, Madhya Pradesh A building in Indo-Islamic style above a pond Madhya Pradesh 1998 (cultural) This nomination comprises monuments dating from the 11th to the 16th centuries. They include rock-cut tombs and temples, mosques, palaces, and pavilions. The Jahaz Mahal palace is pictured.Ancient Buddhist Site, Sarnath, Varanasi, Uttar Pradesh A brick Buddhist stupa Uttar Pradesh 1998 (cultural) This nomination comprises two groups of monuments. The first group includes Buddhist temples, stupas (Dhamek Stupa pictured), and monasteries, as well as the remains of a pillar of Ashoka. They date from the 3rd century BCE to the 12th century CE. The second group is represented by the Chaukhandi Stupa, built in 1588.Sri Harimandir Sahib, Amritsar, Punjab A temple in golden colour with a pool in front Punjab 2004 iii, iv, vi (cultural) Sri Harimandir Sahib, also known as the Golden Temple, is the spiritual centre of Sikhism. The temple complex was rebuilt several times. The architectural layout of the complex reflects the spiritual concepts of the religion. The main temple building is richly decorated with floral patterns, either painted or as marble inlay.River Island of Majuli in midstream of Brahmaputra River in Assam Two men on a boat on a river Assam 2004 ii, iii, v, vi (cultural) Majuli is a large river island in the Brahmaputra River. There are over 200 villages on the island, inhabited by people from various ethnic origins. A characteristic concept of the region is the satras, institutional centres for cultural activities that also serve as democratic mediators for dispute resolution.Namdapha National Park Forest and snow-covered mountains in the background Arunachal Pradesh 2006 vii, ix, x (natural) The national park covers an extensive wilderness area mostly covered in forests and sparsely explored. It is located in the Eastern Himalayas. The highest peak is Dapha Bum, at 4,571 m (14,997 ft).Wild Ass Sanctuary, Little Rann of Kutch Two wild asses Gujarat 2006 x (natural) Little Rann of Kutch is a salt marsh with sparse vegetation, mostly with xerophytic species. It is home to the last wild population of the Indian wild ass (two specimens pictured). It is also an important nesting area for birds.Neora Valley National Park Forest scenery West Bengal 2009 vii, x (natural) The area is covered by virgin forest and is a biodiversity hotspot. The valley spans from lowlands to altitudes around 3,200 m (10,500 ft), which results in a variety of habitats. It is home to several bird species and mammals, including the red panda and two species of pangolin.Desert National Park Sand dunes and some shrubs Rajasthan 2009 vii, viii, x (natural) The national park covers a part of the Thar Desert. It is home to several endemic species, such as the Indian hairy-footed gerbil and the Rajasthan toad-headed lizard. It is also home to two endangered species of vultures. There are fossil beds in the park, dating to the Jurassic period.Silk Road Sites in India Archaeological remains of a stupa Bihar, Jammu and Kashmir, Maharashtra, Puducherry, Punjab, Tamil Nadu, Uttar Pradesh 2010  (cultural) This nomination comprises 12 sites connected to the ancient Silk Road, a network of trade routes connecting China with the west. There were at least three corridors in India. In addition to the movement of goods, they were important in the spread of Buddhism and Greco-Buddhist culture. Sites in the nomination include the Roman trade port at Arikamedu, Vikramashila (pictured) and the early Buddhist site of Vaishali (the Relic Stupa).The Qutb Shahi Monuments of Hyderabad Golconda Fort, Qutb Shahi Tombs, Charminar Two Islamic tombs at sunset Telangana 2010 i, ii, iii, iv (cultural) This nomination comprises the monuments of the Qutb Shahi dynasty, a sultanate that ruled in the 16th and 17th century, in Hyderabad and its surroundings. The Golconda Fort is a citadel and early capital. Qutb Shahi tombs (two pictured) are mosques and burial places of the sultans, and Charminar, built in 1591, is a monumental gateway with four minarets. These sites illustrate the cosmopolitan nature of the region in that period.Mughal Gardens in Kashmir A pavilion in the middle of a pond Jammu and Kashmir 2010 i, ii, iv (cultural) Mughal gardens were built in a style influenced by Persian gardens, particularly by the Charbagh layout, with terraces and fountains arranged around a central water channel, reflecting the Islamic concept of paradise. Six gardens are listed in the nomination: Chashme Shahi, Shalimar Bagh (pavilion pictured), Pari Mahal, Verinag, Achabal Gardens, and Nishat Bagh.Delhi - A Heritage City Two Islamic tombs with white domes and several people around Delhi 2012 ii, v, vi (cultural) Delhi, as Lal Kot, was founded in 1060 as a capital of the Tomara dynasty. Later, rulers built subsequent cities on the site. Delhi was the capital of the Delhi Sultanate and an intermittent capital of the Mughal Empire. During the British rule, the capital was moved from Calcutta to the newly constructed New Delhi in 1911. The nomination lists the following areas of historical and architectural importance: Mehrauli, Nizamuddin Dargah (the tomb of the Sufi saint Nizamuddin Auliya), Shahjahanabad (pictured), and New Delhi.Monuments and Forts of the Deccan Sultanate Fortress gate in red brick Karnataka, Telangana 2014 ii, iii (cultural) This nomination comprises the monuments of Deccan sultanates, dating between the 14th and 17th centuries, in four cities: Gulbarga, Bidar, Bijapur in Karnataka state, and Hyderabad in Telangana state. The architecture of the Deccan sultanates represents interactions between Islamic and Hindu influences. Some of the monuments in the nomination include the Bidar Fort (pictured), Jama Mosque in Gulbarga, and the Qutb Shahi tombs.Cellular Jail, Andaman Islands One of the jail wings with three rows of cells Andaman and Nicobar Islands 2014 iv, vi (cultural) The jail was constructed in 1906 by the British, primarily to exile political prisoners to the remote archipelago. The architecture was based on the panopticon system, with radiating wings that were easy to monitor by a single guard. Jail cells were intended for individuals for confinement. The jail was infamous for the brutal treatment of inmates and is important in the history of the Indian independence movement.Iconic Saree Weaving Clusters of India Picture of different types of saris Madhya Pradesh, Uttar Pradesh, Maharashtra, Andhra Pradesh, Assam 2014 iii, v (cultural) Sari, or saree, is a traditional attire of Indian women. Sari weaving required particular adjustments of the weavers' houses to accommodate looms and other devices for silk processing, resulting in a specific vernacular architecture. This nomination comprises eight clusters where sari weaving was and still is a major profession of the villagers. Different styles of saris are pictured.Apatani Cultural Landscape A hill covered with forest, a village and rice paddies Arunachal Pradesh 2014 iii, v (cultural) Apatani people live in the Ziro Valley that is surrounded by high mountains of the Himalayas. They have a culture that is distinct from that of other tribes in the region, with traditional crafts and festivals. They practice wet rice cultivation and are careful in land management, which allowed sustainable agriculture for several centuries. The resulting cultural landscape reflects the ability of the tribe to make the adverse environment habitable.Sri Ranganathaswamy Temple, Srirangam Two gopuram of a temple, decorated with figures Tamil Nadu 2014 i, ii, iii, v (cultural) The Sri Ranganathaswamy Temple is dedicated to Ranganatha. It is the world's largest operating Hindu temple and is, in fact, a temple town, with inner enclosures constituting the temple and outer ones being used for settlements. There have been temples at the site for over two millennia; however, the key buildings standing today date to the time of the Vijayanagara Empire, from the 14th to the 16th century. The temple has 21 gopurams, which are richly decorated with paintings and sculptures.Monuments of Srirangapatna Island Town A white Islamic mausoleum in a garden Karnataka 2014 i, ii, iii, iv (cultural) Srirangapatna, the river island in the Kaveri river, is an important pilgrimage site in South India. It has been continuously inhabited since the 12th century. The monuments on the island date to different historical periods, including the periods of the Hoysala Empire, Vijayanagara Empire, Kingdom of Mysore, and the British Raj. Most monuments date from the 16th to the 19th centuries and have elements of Hindu, Indo-Islamic, and British styles. The Gumbaz mausoleum is pictured.Chilika Lake A group of Flamingos flying over Chilika Lake Odisha 2014 ix, x (natural) Chilika Lake is a large brackish water lagoon, fed by over 50 rivers and streams. It is an ephemeral environment, with the river sediments being deposited to the Bay of Bengal. Different parts of the lake are freshwater, brackish, and marine ecosystems and are an important habitat for birds and mammals, including the endangered Irrawaddy dolphin. The lake is rich in fish species that support the local fishermen population.Padmanabhapuram Palace A large building with white walls, red roof, and wooden beams Tamil Nadu 2014 iii, iv (cultural) The palace in Padmanabhapuram was constructed in the 16th century, with later additions continuing into the early 19th century, to serve as the seat of the Travancore royal family. It is a masterpiece of traditional timber architecture decorated with murals and carvings. Murals depict Hindu mythology and secular themes.Sites of Satyagrah, India's non-violent freedom movement People in front of an ashram building several sites 2014 iv, vi (cultural) Satyagraha, a form of nonviolent resistance or civil resistance, was developed by Mahatma Gandhi in the first half of the 20th century, as a part of the Indian independence movement. The nomination comprises 22 sites across India related to the movement. Several sites are ashrams (Sabarmati Ashram pictured), founded by Gandhi to teach his philosophy. Other sites are related to the independence movement. Satyagraha theory was influential in the civil rights movement in the United States and in the fight against apartheid in South Africa.Thembang Fortified Village Stone gate to the village Arunachal Pradesh 2014 ii, iii, v (cultural) The village of Thembang is located in the Eastern Himalayas at an altitude above 2,000 m (6,600 ft). It is built as a dzong, a type of fortified monastery also found in neighbouring Bhutan and Tibet. It is inhabited by the Monpas and was constructed before the 12th century.Narcondam Island A bird, hornbill, sitting on a tree branch Andaman and Nicobar Islands 2014 viii, ix, x (natural) Narcondam Island is a volcanic island off the main chain of the Andaman Islands. It is composed mostly of andesite, dacite, and amphibole, types of volcanic rocks and minerals. The island provides an important example of evolutionary processes due to its isolation. It is the only place where the endangered Narcondam hornbill (pictured) is found, and it is also home to several endemic species of the Andaman Islands.Moidams – the Mound-Burial system of the Ahom Dynasty Several tumuli in a forest, tourists walking around Assam 2014 v (cultural) This nomination comprises the tumuli in the town of Charaideo and its surroundings. The town was the capital of the Ahom kingdom (1228–1826), and the tumuli were the burial sites of the royals and nobility. The tumuli create an undulating landscape reminiscent of hills, in line with the spiritual beliefs of the Tai-Ahom people.Ekamra Kshetra – The Temple City, Bhubaneswar A Hindu temple in stone Odisha 2014 i, ii, iii (cultural) Ekamra Kshetra is the name of the old part of the city of Bhubaneswar. It is a holy city and has earned the nickname "Temple City" due to about 700 temples that once stood here. The temples were built between the 3rd century BCE and 15th century CE. They are built in the Kalinga style, and belong to Hindu, Buddhist, and Jain religions. The Lingaraja Temple is pictured. In addition to the temples, there are also Udayagiri and Khandagiri Caves built by Jain worshipers.The Neolithic Settlement of Burzahom A clay pot with an animal with horns painted Jammu and Kashmir 2014 ii, iii, v (cultural) The archaeological site at Burzahom has provided information about different stages of societal development from the 4th to the 2nd millennium BCE. People initially lived in pit-houses and later built houses of mud and brick. There are also remains of megalithic structures. Material remains excavated at the site hint at interactions with cultures of Central and South West Asia. A painted pot from 2700 BCE is pictured.Archaeological remains of a Harappa Port-Town, Lothal Archaeological site with remains of drainage channels Gujarat 2014 v (cultural) Lothal was the only port-town of the Indus Valley civilisation, or Harappan Civilization, from the Bronze Age. It was occupied from around 2400 BCE to 1600 BCE when it was likely damaged by tidal flooding. The settlement consisted of a citadel with wide streets, a warehouse, and a port area along the river. Remains found at the site demonstrate trade links with the Persian Gulf region. The remains of drainage channels are pictured.Mountain Railways of India (Extension) Train on a hilly railway Maharashtra, Himachal Pradesh 2014 ii, iv (cultural) This is a proposed extension of the existing World Heritage Site. It includes the Matheran Hill Railway (pictured) and the Kangra Valley Railway. They were built in the early 20th century; construction involved technical innovation to overcome difficult mountainous terrain.Chettinad, Village Clusters of the Tamil Merchants A large two-storey building with white decorated facade Tamil Nadu 2014 ii, v, vi (cultural) This nomination comprises 11 villages in three clusters. Wealthy merchants built them in the second half of the 19th and early 20th centuries. The villages mix urban and rural influences, both Tamil and those from a broader region, as a result of the travels of the merchants in Southeast Asia. Thousands of palatial houses were built using local and imported materials. The most recent ones, built in the 1930s and 1940s, are in the Art Deco style. An example of a palatial house is pictured.Bahá'í House of Worship at New Delhi A temple in the shape of a lotus flower Delhi 2014 i, v, vi (cultural) The Lotus Temple is the main Baháʼí House of Worship in India. It was inaugurated in 1986. It has the shape of a lotus flower, with petals made of concrete and covered by marble.Evolution of Temple Architecture – Aihole-Badami-Pattadakal A Hindu temple in red stone Karnataka 2015 iii, iv (cultural) This nomination comprises several temples in Aihole, Badami, and Pattadakal, that were built between the 6th and 8th centuries under the Chalukya dynasty. They demonstrated the evolution of Hindu temple architecture with rock-cut and free-standing temples and were influential in temples built in later periods. The temples at Pattadakal are already listed as a World Heritage Site. The Durga Temple in Aihole is pictured.Cold Desert Cultural Landscape of India A monastery in a mountain valley covered by snow Ladakh, Himachal Pradesh 2015 iii, v, vi, x (mixed) The landscapes in the Himalayas are characterized by high altitudes, between 3,000 m (9,800 ft) and 5,000 m (16,000 ft), and harsh dry weather and temperatures ranging from above 30 °C (86 °F) in summer to below −30 °C (−22 °F) in winter. Two areas are inhabited, the Ladakh and the Spiti Valley. The culture is a mixture of Indian and Tibetan cultures. Several settlements are linked to Buddhist monasteries (Key Monastery pictured). From the natural perspective, the area is home to endangered species such as the snow leopard, Tibetan antelope, and the Himalayan wolf.Sites along the Uttarapath, Badshahi Sadak, Sadak-e-Azam, Grand Trunk Road A stone pillar close to a road several sites 2015 ii, iv, vi (cultural) The Grand Trunk Road is one of Asia's oldest and longest roads. It connects Afghanistan, Pakistan, India, and Bangladesh. The road has been used at least since the times of the Maurya Empire in the 4th century BCE, has been reconstructed several times in different periods, and has been upgraded to modern traffic in the 20th century. In addition to trade, the road has been instrumental in the spread of ideas, religions, and culture. Several historical sites have been preserved along the road. The Kos Minar, a milestone, in Ambala is pictured.Keibul Lamjao Conservation Area Lake with some floating plants Manipur 2016 (mixed) Loktak Lake is a large freshwater lake that features a unique type of ecosystem called phumdi, floating islands consisting of soil and vegetation. The area is a mixture of aquatic, wetland, and terrestrial habitats, and is home to sangai, an endangered deer species. There are several villages on the shores of the lake, as well as some settlements on the phumdis.Garo Hills Conservation Area (GHCA) A couple in traditional dresses Meghalaya 2018 v, vi, viii, x (mixed) Garo Hills are inhabited by the Garo people (a couple pictured), a tribe that speaks a language from the Tibeto-Burman family. They practice slash-and-burn agriculture regulated by community rules to ensure sustainable land use. The area is interesting from a geological perspective, with the terrain being shaped by the India–Asia collision system. The area is home to Asian elephant, gaur, clouded leopard, sambar deer, and five species of civet.The historic ensemble of Orchha A palace overlooking a forest and a river Madhya Pradesh 2019 ii, iv (cultural) The town of Orchha was founded in the 16th century by the Bundela clan to serve as their capital. In the following century, it came under Mughal influence. The architecture of the fort complex, palaces, temples, and gardens represent a mixture of styles from Rajput and Mughal architecture. The Jahangir Mahal is pictured.Iconic Riverfront of the Historic City of Varanasi Ganges riverfront with steps, temples, people, and boats Uttar Pradesh 2021 iii, iv, vi (cultural) Varanasi is a holy city of Hinduism, Buddhism, and Jainism. More than 80 ghats (steps to the river bank) are located along the Ganges, the holy river, and serve as a place for rituals and festivals. Varanasi has been continuously inhabited since at least 1200 BCE, while the earliest stone ghats date to the 14th century. Palatial buildings, temples, ashrams, and rest houses for pilgrims date to the 18th and later centuries. The Ahilya Ghat is pictured.Temples of Kanchipuram A Hindu temple in Tamil style Tamil Nadu 2021 iv, vi (cultural) Kanchipuram was the capital of the Pallava dynasty from the 6th to the 9th century. It is a holy Hindu city which used to have hundreds of temples. The architecture marks the shift from rock-cut temples to free-standing structures. 11 temples are listed in the nomination. The Ekambareswarar Temple is pictured.Hire Benakal, Megalithic Site Several prehistoric dolmens Karnataka 2021 iii, iv (cultural) Hire Benakal is the largest megalithic site in India. The dolmens date to the 1st millennium BCE to the Iron Age and provide information about the culture that constructed India's first large-scale monuments. Rock paintings have also been discovered on site. Depictions of human figures, riders, and animals date roughly from 700 to 500 BCE, while some paintings are older, from the Mesolithic.Bhedaghat-Lametaghat in Narmada Valley River flowing through a gorge with white marble stones Madhya Pradesh 2021 vii, viii (natural) At Bhedaghat, the Narmada River has carved a canyon through a mountain of white marble (pictured), creating a landscape that is both popular with tourists for its perceived beauty and of special interest for geologists. The Lameta Formation contains several fossils, including those of dinosaurs and crocodilians.Satpura Tiger Reserve River, forest, and hills scenery Madhya Pradesh 2021 vii, ix, x (natural) The forests in the Satpura Range hills are protected as a habitat for a large population of tiger. The area acts as a faunal bridge between the Western Ghats and the Himalayas and is also home to several endangered plant species.Serial Nomination of Maratha Military Architecture in Maharashtra Two fortress towers, partially in ruin Maharashtra 2021 ii, iii, iv (cultural) This nomination comprises 14 forts in Maharashtra. They are typically constructed of basalt rocks on the hills and were used for defensive purposes in different historical periods. The forts are connected to the Marathi ruler Chhatrapati Shivaji, who commissioned several of them in the 17th century. The Raigad Fort is pictured.Geoglyphs of Konkan Region of India Geoglyphs of Konkan Goa Maharashtra, Goa 2022 i, iii, iv (cultural) This nomination comprises 10 sites with geoglyphs in the Konkan coast. They date from the Mesolithic period, about ten millennia BCE to the second millennium BCE. They depict animals, human figures, and abstract art, and are related to the transition from hunter-gatherer societies to settled ones.
Jingkieng jri: Living Root Bridge Cultural Landscapes Two bridges, consisting of tree roots, crossing a river Meghalaya 2022 (cultural) A living root bridge is a type of simple suspension bridge formed of living plant roots by tree shaping. They are handmade from the aerial roots of rubber fig trees (Ficus elastica) over several generations and are common in the communities of the Khasi people. The bridges reflect a harmonious relationship between people and nature. An example of such a bridge in Nongriat village is pictured.
Sri Veerabhadra Temple and Monolithic Bull (Nandi), Lepakshi (The Vijayanagara Sculpture and Painting Art Tradition) A Hindu temple in stone Andhra Pradesh 2022 i, ii, vi (cultural) The Hindu temple is located in the village of Lepakshi. The temple's construction started around 1100, while the major development took place during the period of the Vijayanagara Empire, from 1350 to 1600, when a large complex was built. The temple contains important examples of Vijayanagara art, including the only surviving frescoes from that period. A large monolithic bull (Nandi) is located on the temple grounds.
Sun Temple, Modhera and its adjoining monuments A Hindu temple complex in stone Gujarat 2022 i, iv (cultural) The temple complex, a prominent example of the Māru-Gurjara style from the 11th century, is dedicated to the Sun God. It has three components: Gūḍhamanḍapa, the shrine hall; Sabhamanḍapa, the assembly hall; and Kunḍa, the reservoir.
Rock-cut Sculptures and Reliefs of the Unakoti, Unakoti Range, Unakoti District Rock cut bas relief of Hindu deity Tripura 2022 i, iv (cultural) Unakoti features colossal rock cut panels and bas relief sculptures depicting Hindu deities, which date from the 8th and 9th centuries. They were created by the adherents of Shaivism, with the style influenced by local folk arts.
Vadnagar – A multi-layered Historic town, Gujarat A torana gate in stone Gujarat 2022 ii, v (cultural) The town has been continuously occupied since 750 BCE, with monuments such as gates (Kirti Toran pictured), fortresses, and temples constructed throughout different historical periods. Remains found on site demonstrate the trade connections with the Indo-Greek Kingdom and the Roman Empire.
Serial nomination of Coastal Fortifications along the Konkan Coast, Maharashtra Maharashtra 2024 This nomination comprises 9 forts in Maharashtra.
The historic ensemble of Dhamnar Madhya Pradesh 2024 The Dhamnar Caves are rock-cut caves dating back to between the 5th and 7th centuries CE. 
The Gond monuments of Ramnagar, Mandla Madhya Pradesh 2024 The monument represents the historical and cultural heritage of the Gond people, one of India's largest indigenous communities. These monuments include a range of architectural structures such as forts, palaces, and temples, reflecting the rich history and architectural ingenuity of the Gond dynasty that once ruled the region. The Gond monuments are significant for their distinctive art and architectural styles, which incorporate local traditions and materials. They serve as a testament to the Gond civilization's socio-political and religious life, offering insights into the community's way of life, beliefs, and governance.
The Bhojeshwar Mahadev Temple, Bhojpur A temple Madhya Pradesh 2024 An unfinished Hindu temple dedicated to Lord Shiva. Dating back to the 11th century, it was commissioned by the Paramara king Bhoja, renowned for his contributions to art, literature, and architecture. The temple is famed for its massive lingam, one of the largest in India, housed within a spacious sanctum. Despite its unfinished state, the temple showcases exquisite architectural techniques and carvings characteristic of medieval Hindu temple architecture. The site includes architectural plans engraved on the surrounding rocks, providing unique insights into the construction practices of the time
Rock Art Sites of the Chambal Valley Madhya Pradesh 2024 A series of ancient paintings and engravings that date back to the Mesolithic period. These sites offer a window into prehistoric life, showcasing a range of subjects from daily activities to sacred rituals, animals, and abstract forms. Found across the rugged terrain of the valley, these artworks demonstrate the early human inclination towards expression and communication. The variety in styles and themes across different periods provides valuable insights into the cultural and social evolution of early societies in the region
Khooni Bhandara, Burhanpur Madhya Pradesh 2024 Underground water management system dating back to the 16th century. Designed during the Mughal era, this network of tunnels is an engineering marvel that facilitated water supply to the city. The name 'Khooni Bhandara' translates to 'Bloody Canal', a moniker that belies its peaceful purpose and possibly refers to the challenging conditions under which it was constructed. Utilizing gravity for water flow, it showcases advanced hydrological and architectural knowledge of the time. Despite its age, much of the system remains functional today.
Gwalior Fort, Madhya Pradesh Fortress wall on a hill with several towers and elaborate decoration Madhya Pradesh 2024 ii, iv (cultural) A historic military fortification, built in the 8th century, is positioned on a sandstone hill. It comprises palaces, temples, and water tanks, displaying various architectural styles. Key structures include the Teli ka Mandir and Saas-Bahu Temple. The fort is notable for its strategic design and the use of blue ceramic tiles for decoration. It serves as an important example of Indian architecture and history.
Indian painting has a very long tradition and history in Indian art. The earliest Indian paintings were the rock paintings of prehistoric times, such as the petroglyphs found in places like the Bhimbetka rock shelters. Some of the Stone Age rock paintings found among the Bhimbetka rock shelters are approximately 10,000 years old. Because of the climatic conditions in the Indian subcontinent, very few early examples survive today.
India's ancient Hindu and Buddhist literature has many mentions of palaces and other buildings decorated with paintings (chitra), but the paintings of the Ajanta Caves are the most significant of the few ones which survive. Smaller scale painting in manuscripts was probably also practised in this period, though the earliest survivals are from the medieval period. A new style emerged in the Mughal era as a fusion of the Persian miniature with older Indian traditions, and from the 17th century its style was diffused across Indian princely courts of all religions, each developing a local style. Company paintings were made for British clients under the British raj, which from the 19th century also introduced art schools along Western lines. This led to modern Indian painting, which is increasingly returning to its Indian roots.
Indian paintings can be broadly classified as murals, miniatures and paintings on cloth. Murals are large works executed on the walls of solid structures, as in the Ajanta Caves and the Kailashnath temple. Miniature paintings are executed on a very small scale for books or albums on perishable material such as paper and cloth. Traces of murals, in fresco-like techniques, survive in a number of sites with Indian rock-cut architecture, going back at least 2,000 years, but the 1st and 5th-century remains at the Ajanta Caves are much the most significant.
Paintings on cloth were often produced in a more popular context, often as folk art, used for example by travelling reciters of epic poetry, such as the Bhopas of Rajasthan and Chitrakathi elsewhere, and bought as souvenirs of pilgrimages. Very few survivals are older than about 200 years, but it is clear the traditions are much older. Some regional traditions are still producing works.
It seems clear that miniature painting, often illustrating manuscripts, has a very long history, but Jain miniatures from about the 12th century, mostly from West India, and slightly earlier Buddhist ones from the Pala Empire in the east are the oldest to survive. Similar Hindu illustrations survive from about the 15th century in the west, and 16th century in East India, by which time the Mughal miniature under Akbar was also sometimes illustrating translations into Persian of the Hindu epics and other subjects.
The great period of Mughal court painting begins with the return of Humayun from exile in Persia in 1555 and bringing Persian artists with him. It ends during the reign of Aurangzeb who rather disapproved of painting for religious reasons, and disbanded the large imperial workshop, by perhaps 1670. The artists dispersed to smaller princely courts, both Muslim and Hindu, and the ""post-Mughal"" style developed in many local variants. These included different Rajasthani schools of painting like the Bundi, Kishangarh, Jaipur, Marwar and Mewar. The Ragamala paintings also belong to this school, as does the later Company painting produced for British clients from the mid-18th century.
Modern Indian art has seen the rise of the Bengal School of art in 1930s followed by many forms of experimentations in European and Indian styles. In the aftermath of India's independence, many new genres of art developed by important artists like Jamini Roy, M. F. Husain, Francis Newton Souza, and Vasudeo S. Gaitonde. With the progress of the economy the forms and styles of art also underwent many changes. In the 1990s, Indian economy was liberalised and integrated to the world economy leading to the free flow of cultural information within and without. Artists include Subodh Gupta, Atul Dodiya, Devajyoti Ray, Bose Krishnamachari and Jitish Kallat whose works went for auction in international markets. Bharti Dayal has chosen to handle the traditional Mithila painting in most contemporary way and created her own style through the exercises of her own imagination, they appear fresh and unusual.
The pre-historic paintings were generally executed on rocks and these rock engravings were called petroglyphs. These paintings generally depict animals like bison, bear, tigers etc. The oldest Indian paintings are rock art in caves which are around 30,000 years old, such as the Bhimbetka cave paintings.
There are many important dedicated Indian treatises on painting, traditionally called chitra. Some of these are chapters within a larger encyclopedia-like texts. They date between the 4th and 13th-century CE. These include:
These and other texts on painting discuss the Indian ideas, theory and practice of painting, its relationship to other arts, methods of preparing the canvas or wall, recipes to make color pigments and other topics.
The history of Indian murals starts in ancient and early medieval times, from the 2nd century BC to 8th – 10th century AD. There are known more than 20 locations around India containing murals from this period, mainly natural caves and rock-cut chambers. These include the caves of Ajanta, Bagh, Sittanavasal, Armamalai Cave (Tamil Nadu), Kailasanatha temple in Ellora Caves, Ramgarh and Sitabinji.
Murals from this period depict mainly religious themes of Buddhist, Jain and Hindu religions. There are though also locations where paintings were secular. This includes the oldest known painted cave and theatre in Chhattisgarh – the Jogimara and Sitabenga Caves – dated to between the 3rd to 1st century BCE.
Early survivals of portable Indian paintings are all miniatures from texts (the great majority) or painted objects such as boxes. Despite considerable evidence that larger paintings on cloth (known as pata) existed, and indeed surviving texts discussing how to make them, not a single medieval Indian painting on cloth is known to survive, unless some Buddhist ones have been taken as Tibetan, or from Central Asia. Some of the images recovered there by Sir Aurel Stein are Indian paintings, most being Buddhist and some with Hindu deities such as Ganesha and Shiva. According to Blurton, such early paintings did not survive largely because of the deleterious climate of India, as well as due to the ""added problem of Muslim iconoclasm"" in the centuries that followed.
The pattern of large scale wall painting which had dominated the scene, witnessed the advent of miniature paintings during the 11th and 12th centuries. This new style figured first in the form of illustrations etched on palm-leaf manuscripts.[citation needed]
In eastern India, the principal centres of artistic and intellectual activities of the Buddhist religion were Nalanda, Odantapuri, Vikramshila and Somarpura situated in the Pala kingdom (Bengal and Bihar). Miniature painting from this region survives from the 10th century. These miniatures, depicting Buddhist divinities and scenes from the life of Buddha were painted on the leaves (about 2.25 by 3 inches) of the palm-leaf manuscripts as well as their wooden covers. Most common Buddhist illustrated manuscripts include the texts Astasahasrika Prajnaparamita, Pancharaksa, Karandavyuha and Kalachakra Tantra. The earliest extant miniatures are found in a manuscript of the Astasahasrika Prajnaparamita dated in the sixth regnal year of Mahipala (c. 993), presently the possession of The Asiatic Society, Kolkata. This style disappeared from India in the late 12th century.
The influence of eastern Indian paintings can be seen in various Buddhist temples in Bagan, Myanmar particularly Abeyadana temple which was named after Queen consort of Myanmar, Abeyadana who herself had Indian roots and Gubyaukgyi Temple. The influences of eastern Indian paintings can also be clearly observed in Tibetan Thangka paintings.
Surviving illustrated manuscripts from Western India, mainly Gujarat, begin around the 11th century, but are mostly from the 13th onwards. Initially surviving examples are all Jain. By the 15th-century they were becoming increasingly lavish, with much use of gold.
The manuscript text most frequently illustrated is the Kalpa Sūtra, containing the biographies of the Tirthankaras, notably Parshvanatha and Mahavira. The illustrations are square-ish panels set in the text, with ""wiry drawing"" and ""brilliant, even jewel-like colour"". The figures are always seen in three-quarters view, with distinctive ""long pointed noses and protruding eyes"". There is a convention whereby the more distant side of the face protrudes, so that both eyes are seen.
Ancient texts defined six important aspects of painting. These 'Six Limbs' have been translated as follows: Rupabheda The knowledge of appearances.
Pramanam Correct perception, measure and structure.
Bhava Action of feelings on forms.
Lavanya Yojanam Infusion of grace, artistic representation.
Sadrisyam Similitude.
Varnikabhanga Artistic manner of using the brush and colours. (Tagore.)
The subsequent development of painting by the Buddhists indicates that these ' Six Limbs ' were put into practice by Indian artists, and are the basic principles on which their art was founded.
Mughal painting is a style of Indian painting, generally confined to illustrations on the book and done in miniatures, and which emerged, developed and took shape during the period of the Mughal Empire between the 16th and 19th centuries. The Mughal style was heavily influenced by Persian miniatures, and in turn influenced several Indian styles, including the Rajput, Pahari and Deccan styles of painting.
Mughal paintings were a unique blend of Indian, Persian and Islamic styles. Because the Mughal kings wanted visual records of their deeds as hunters and conquerors, their artists accompanied them on military expeditions or missions of state, or recorded their prowess as animal slayers, or depicted them in the great dynastic ceremonies of marriages.
Akbar's reign (1556–1605) ushered a new era in Indian miniature painting. After he had consolidated his political power, he built a new capital at Fatehpur Sikri where he collected artists from India and Persia. He was the first monarch who established in India an atelier under the supervision of two Persian master artists, Mir Sayyed Ali and Abdus Samad. Earlier, both of them had served under the patronage of Humayun in Kabul and accompanied him to India when he regained his throne in 1555. More than a hundred painters were employed, most of whom were from Gujarat, Gwalior and Kashmir, who gave a birth to a new school of painting, popularly known as the Mughal School of miniature Paintings.
Tuti-Nama was an early Mughal work from the mid 16th Century, and the similarities particularly in the female figures to the indigenous western India school is clearly visible. While some consider this to be a transition phase where the stylistic features of indigenous & Persian schools combined, other considered this to be a work of artists who were trained in western India school and who worked in Akbar's atelier to produce art for the Mughal palette, maybe under supervision of Persian masters.
Another early production by that school of miniature painting was the Akbar Hamzanama manuscript, which according to the court historian Badayuni was started in 1567 and completed in 1582. The Hamzanama, an epic Persian account of Amir Hamza, an uncle of the Prophet, were illustrated by Mir Sayyid Ali. The paintings of the Akbar Hamzanama are of large size, 20 x 27"", and were painted on cloth. They are in the Persian safavi style. Brilliant red, blue and green colours predominate; the pink, eroded rocks and the vegetation, planes and blossoming plum and peach trees are reminiscent of Persia. The Hamza Nama is very different in style to the Tuti Nama. This difference was either due to a different set of artists who were trained in the Persian style or due to a conscious change in style through experimentation, either ways, mughal painting quickly evolved into more fluid and naturalistic style different from the stiffness in figures seen in earlier paintings. Nevertheless, links to the western India schools were still there on close inspection, particularly in the representation of the female figure.
After him, Jahangir encouraged artists to paint portraits and durbar scenes. His most talented portrait painters were Ustad Mansur, Abul Hasan and Bishandas.
Shah Jahan (1627–1658) continued the patronage of painting. Some of the famous artists of the period were Mohammad Faqirullah Khan, Mir Hashim, Muhammad Nadir, Bichitr, Chitarman, Anupchhatar, Manohar and Honhar.
Aurangzeb had no taste for fine arts, probably due to his Islamic conservatism. Due to lack of patronage artists migrated to the Deccan and the Hindu courts of Rajputana, greatly influencing the styles in these centres.
Deccan painting was produced in the Deccan region of Central India, in the various Muslim capitals of the Deccan sultanates that emerged from the break-up of the Bahmani Sultanate by 1520. These were Bijapur, Golkonda, Ahmadnagar, Bidar, and Berar. The main period was between the late 16th century and the mid-17th, with something of a revival in the mid-18th century, by then centred on Hyderabad.
Compared to the early Mughal painting evolving at the same time to the north, Deccan painting exceeds in ""the brilliance of their colour, the sophistication and artistry of their composition, and a general air of decadent luxury"". Other differences include painting faces, not very expertly modelled, in three-quarter view, rather than mostly in profile in the Mughal style, and ""tall women with small heads"" wearing saris. There are many royal portraits, although they lack the precise likenesses of their Mughal equivalents. Buildings are depicted as ""totally flat screen-like panels"".
Ragamala paintings, sets illustrating (by evoking their moods) the various raga musical forms, appear to have been an innovation of the Deccan. Beside the usual portraits and illustrations to literary works, there are sometimes illustrated chronicles, such as the Tuzuk-i-Asafiya. A Deccan speciality (also sometimes found in other media, such as ivory) is the ""composite animal"" a large animal made up of many smaller images of other animals.
The early Mewar and Malwa schools, sometimes also collectively known as Western India school, developed around this period, and are stylistically similar and linked to the style of depiction in 14th–15th century texts from Gujarat. The similar large eyes, stiff figures, protruding hips and breasts are a linking feature. The Kulhadar group of paintings is considered one of the finest works executed belonging to the western India school. Executed in early 16th century, this group paintings were characterized by the men wearing a conical cap (Kulha) on which turbans were worn. The Kulhadar group of paintings consisted of Chaurapanchasika – ""Fifty Verses of the Thief"" by Bilhan, the Gita Govinda, the Bhagavata Purana and Ragamala.
Driven by the Islamic conquests, the mid-late 16th Century saw central Asian influence starting to creep into Indian artistic representation. The use of gold foil and ultramarine blue derived from imported lapiz lazuli were two such Persian influences which were adopted into Indian painting. Manuscripts of Laur Chanda at the National Museum are an example of such influence.
Several different styles of Rajput painting developed from the late 16th century onwards in the Hindu royal courts of Rajputana. Each Rajput kingdom evolved a distinct style, but with certain common features. Rajput paintings depict a number of themes, events of epics like the Ramayana and the Mahabharata, Krishna's life, beautiful landscapes, and humans. Many miniatures were individual album pieces, but there are also illustrated books, and there was at the same time some mural painting on the walls of palaces, forts, and havelis. This especially so in the Shekhawati region, where Marwari businessmen, mainly active in the large cities, competed to have brightly painted exteriors of the houses they maintained in their home region.
Rajput painting consists of four principal groupings:The Mewar school that contains the Chavand, Nathdwara, Devgarh, Udaipur and Sawar styles of painting
The Marwar school comprising the Kishangarh, Bikaner style of painting from Bikaner, Jodhpur, Nagaur, Pali and Ghanerao styles
The Hadoti school with the Kota, Bundi and Jhalawar styles and The Dhundar school of Amber, Jaipur, Shekhawati painting and Uniara styles of painting.
Pahari painting is the northernmost extension of the Rajput style, but usually treated separately.
The Pahari style also referred to as the Punjab Hills style developed and flourished during 17th to 19th centuries stretching from Jammu to Almora and Garhwal, in the sub-Himalayan India, through Himachal Pradesh. The Pahari paintings can be grouped into two groups- Jammu or Dogra school; and Basholi and Kangra school. Each created stark variations within the genre, ranging from bold intense Basohli Painting, originating from Basohli in Jammu and Kashmir, to the delicate and lyrical Kangra paintings, which became synonymous to the style before other schools of paintings developed.
A new trend in manuscript illustration was set by a manuscript of the Nimatnama painted at Mandu, during the reign of Nasir Shah (1500–1510). This represent a synthesis of the indigenous and the patronized Persian style, though it was the latter which dominated the Mandu manuscripts.[citation needed] There was another style of painting known as Lodi Khuladar that flourished in the Sultanate's dominion of North India extending from Delhi to Jaunpur.[citation needed]
Mysore painting is an important form of classical South Indian painting that originated in the town of Mysore in Karnataka. These paintings are known for their elegance, muted colours and attention to detail. The themes for most of these paintings are Hindu Gods and Goddesses and scenes from Hindu mythology. In modern times, these paintings have become a much sought-after souvenir during festive occasions in South India.
The process of making a Mysore painting involves many stages. The first stage involves the making of the preliminary sketch of the image on the base. The base consists of cartridge paper pasted on a wooden base. A paste made of zinc oxide and arabic gum is made called ""gesso paste"". With the help of a thin brush all the jewellery and parts of throne or the arch which have some relief are painted over to give a slightly raised effect of carving. This is allowed to dry. On this thin gold foil is pasted. The rest of the drawing is then painted using watercolours. Only muted colours are used.
Tanjore painting is an important form of classical South Indian painting native to the town of Tanjore in Tamil Nadu. The art form dates back to the early 9th century, a period dominated by the Chola rulers, who encouraged art and literature. These paintings are known for their elegance, rich colours, and attention to detail. The themes for most of these paintings are Hindu Gods and Goddesses and scenes from Hindu mythology. In modern times, these paintings have become a much sought-after souvenir during festive occasions in South India.
The process of making a Tanjore painting involves many stages. The first stage involves the making of the preliminary sketch of the image on the base. The base consists of a cloth pasted over a wooden base. Then chalk powder or zinc oxide is mixed with water-soluble adhesive and apply it on the base. To make the base smoother, a mild abrasive is sometimes used. After the drawing is made, decoration of the jewelry and the apparels in the image is done with semi-precious stones. Laces or threads are also used to decorate the jewelry. On top of this, the gold foils are pasted. Finally, dyes are used to add colours to the figures in the paintings.
Pattachitra refers to the Classical painting of Odisha and West Bengal, in the eastern region of India.'Patta' in Sanskrit means 'Vastra' or 'clothing' and 'chitra' means paintings.
The Bengal Patachitra refers to the painting of West Bengal. It is a traditional and mythological heritage of West Bengal. The Bengal Patachitra is divided into some different aspects like Durga Pat, Chalchitra, Tribal Patachitra, Medinipur Patachitra, Kalighat Patachitra etc. The subject matter of Bengal Patachitra is mostly mythological, religious stories, folk lore and social. The Kalighat Patachitra, the last tradition of Bengal Patachitra is developed by Jamini Roy. The artist of the Bengal Patachitra is called Patua.
The tradition of Orisha Pattachitra is closely linked with the worship of Lord Jagannath. Apart from the fragmentary evidence of paintings on the caves of Khandagiri and Udayagiri and Sitabhinji murals of the Sixth century A.D., the earliest indigenous paintings from Odisha are the Pattachitra done by the Chitrakars (the painters are called Chitrakars). The theme of Oriya painting centres round the Vaishnava sect. Since beginning of Pattachitra culture Lord Jagannath who was an incarnation of Lord Krishna was the major source of inspiration. The subject matter of Patta Chitra is mostly mythological, religious stories and folk lore. Themes are chiefly on Lord Jagannath and Radha-Krishna, different ""Vesas"" of Jagannath, Balabhadra and Subhadra, temple activities, the ten incarnations of Vishnu basing on the 'Gita Govinda' of Jayadev, Kama Kujara Naba Gunjara, Ramayana, Mahabharata. The individual paintings of gods and goddesses are also being painted.The painters use vegetable and mineral colours without going for factory made poster colours. They prepare their own colours. White colour is made from the conch-shells by powdering, boiling and filtering in a very hazardous process. It requires a lot of patience. But this process gives brilliance and permanence to the hue. 'Hingula', a mineral colour, is used for red. 'Haritala', king of stone ingredients for yellow, 'Ramaraja' a sort of indigo for blue are being used. Pure lamp-black or black prepared from the burning of cocoanut shells are used.The brushes that are used by these 'Chitrakaras' are also indigenous and are made of hair of domestic animals. A bunch of hair tied to the end of a bamboo stick make the brush. It is really a matter of wonder as to how these painters bring out lines of such precision and finish with the help of these crude brushes. That old tradition of Oriya painting still survives to-day in the skilled hands of Chitrakaras (traditional painters) in Puri, Raghurajpur, Paralakhemundi, Chikiti and Sonepur.
Painting of Assam led to its growth in response to Neo-Vaisnavism movement starting in the 15th century and even received royal patronage under various erstwhile royal classes. Manuscript painting of Assam continued to flourish till the decay of the Ahom kingdom.
Madhubani painting is a style of painting, practiced in the Mithila region of Bihar state. Themes revolve around Hindu Gods and mythology, along with scenes from the royal court and social events like weddings. Generally no space is left empty; the gaps are filled by paintings of flowers, animals, birds, and even geometric designs.In this paintings, artists use leaves, herbs, and flowers to make the colour which is used to draw the paintings.
As Company rule in India began in the 18th century, a great number of Europeans migrated to India. The Company style is a term for a hybrid Indo-European style of paintings made in India by Indian and European artists, many of whom worked for European patrons in the British East India Company or other foreign Companies in the 18th and 19th centuries. The style blended traditional elements from Rajput and Mughal painting with a more Western treatment of perspective, volume and recession.
At the start of the 18th century, oil and easel painting began in India, which saw many European artists, such as Zoffany, Kettle, Hodges, Thomas and William Daniell, Joshua Reynolds, Emily Eden and George Chinnery coming out to India in search of fame and fortune. The courts of the princely states of India were an important draw for European artists due to their patronage of the visual and performing arts. For Indian artists, this Western influence, largely a result of colonialism, was viewed as ""a means for self-improvement"", and these Western academic artists who visited India provided the model. They did not, however, provide the training. According to R. Siva Kumar, ""This task, which fell on the various art schools established in the 1850s, gave an institutional framework to the Westernization of Indian art"".
The earliest formal art schools in India, namely the Government College of Fine Arts in Madras (1850), Government College of Art & Craft in Calcutta (1854) and Sir J. J. School of Art in Bombay (1857), were established.
Raja Ravi Varma was a pioneer of modern Indian painting. He drew on Western traditions and techniques including oil paint and easel painting, with his subjects being purely Indian, such as Hindu deities and episodes from the epics and Puranas. Some other prominent Indian painters born in the 19th century are Mahadev Vishwanath Dhurandhar (1867–1944), A X Trindade (1870–1935), M F Pithawalla (1872–1937), Sawlaram Lakshman Haldankar (1882–1968) and Hemen Majumdar (1894–1948).
In the 19th century, according to R. Siva Kumar, ""selective Westernization for self-improvement gave way to a nationalist cultural counter-stance around the turn of the century – universally, the first step toward a political resistance toward colonial rule"". In practice, this materialized as an assimilation of ""diverse Asian elements"", expanding tradition more than reviving it. Leading artist of the time, Abanindranath Tagore (1871–1951), utilized both the Western-influenced realism and Asian elements which brought him ""close to early modernism"".
A reaction to the Western influence led to a revival in historic and more nationalistic Indian art, called as the Bengal school of art, which drew from the rich cultural heritage of India.
The Bengal School of Art was an influential style of art that flourished in India during the British Raj in the early 20th century. It was associated with Indian nationalism, but was also promoted and supported by many British arts administrators.
The Bengal school arose as an avant garde and nationalist movement reacting against the academic art styles previously promoted in India, both by Indian artists such as Ravi Varma and in British art schools. Following the widespread influence of Indian spiritual ideas in the West, the British art teacher Ernest Binfield Havel attempted to reform the teaching methods at the Calcutta School of Art by encouraging students to imitate Mughal miniatures. This caused immense controversy, leading to a strike by students and complaints from the local press, including from nationalists who considered it to be a retrogressive move. Havel was supported by the artist Abanindranath Tagore, a nephew of the poet and artist Rabindranath Tagore. Abanindranath painted a number of works influenced by Mughal art, a style that he and Havel believed to be expressive of India's distinct spiritual qualities, as opposed to the ""materialism"" of the West. His best-known painting, Bharat Mata (Mother India), depicted a young woman, portrayed with four arms in the manner of Hindu deities, holding objects symbolic of India's national aspirations.
Tagore later attempted to develop links with Far-Eastern artists as part of an aspiration to construct a pan-Asianist model of art. Those associated with this Indo-Far Eastern model included Nandalal Bose, Mukul Dey, Kalipada Ghoshal, Benode Behari Mukherjee, Vinayak Shivaram Masoji, B.C. Sanyal, Beohar Rammanohar Sinha, and subsequently their students A. Ramachandran, Tan Yuan Chameli, Ramananda Bandopadhyay and a few others.
The Bengal school's influence on Indian art scene gradually started alleviating with the spread of modernist ideas post-independence.K. G. Subramanyan's role in this movement is significant.
The term Contextual Modernism that Siva Kumar used in the catalogue of the exhibition has emerged as a postcolonial critical tool in the understanding of the art the Santiniketan artists had practised.
Several terms including Paul Gilroy's counter culture of modernity and Tani Barlow's Colonial modernity have been used to describe the kind of alternative modernity that emerged in non-European contexts. Professor Gall argues that 'Contextual Modernism' is a more suited term because ""the colonial in colonial modernity does not accommodate the refusal of many in colonised situations to internalise inferiority. Santiniketan’s artist teachers' refusal of subordination incorporated a counter vision of modernity, which sought to correct the racial and cultural essentialism that drove and characterised imperial Western modernity and modernism. Those European modernities, projected through a triumphant British colonial power, provoked nationalist responses, equally problematic when they incorporated similar essentialisms"".
According to R. Siva Kumar "The Santiniketan artists were one of the first who consciously challenged this idea of modernism by opting out of both internationalist modernism and historicist indigenousness and tried to create a context sensitive modernism." He had been studying the work of the Santiniketan masters and thinking about their approach to art since the early 80s. The practice of subsuming Nandalal Bose, Rabindranath Tagore, Ram Kinker Baij and Benode Behari Mukherjee under the Bengal School of Art was, according to Siva Kumar, misleading. This happened because early writers were guided by genealogies of apprenticeship rather than their styles, worldviews, and perspectives on art practice.
The literary critic Ranjit Hoskote while reviewing the works of contemporary artist Atul Dodiya writes, ""The exposure to Santinketan, through a literary detour, opened Dodiya’s eyes to the historical circumstances of what the art historian R Siva Kumar has called a ""contextual modernism"" developed in eastern India in the 1930s and '40s during the turbulent decades of the global Depression, the Gandhian liberation struggle, the Tagorean cultural renaissance and World War II.""
Contextual Modernism in the recent past has found its usage in other related fields of studies, specially in Architecture.
During the colonial era, Western influences started to make an impact on Indian art. Some artists developed a style that used Western ideas of composition, perspective and realism to illustrate Indian themes. Others, like Jamini Roy, consciously drew inspiration from folk art. Bharti Dayal has chosen to handle the traditional Mithila Painting in most contemporary way and uses both realism as well abstractionism in her work with a lot of fantasy mixed in to both .Her work has an impeccable sense of balance, harmony and grace.
By the time of Independence in 1947, several schools of art in India provided access to modern techniques and ideas. Galleries were established to showcase these artists. Modern Indian art typically shows the influence of Western styles, but is often inspired by Indian themes and images. Major artists are beginning to gain international recognition, initially among the Indian diaspora, but also among non-Indian audiences.
The Progressive Artists' Group, established shortly after India became independent in 1947, was intended to establish new ways of expressing India in the post-colonial era. The founders were six eminent artists – K. H. Ara, S. K. Bakre, H. A. Gade, M.F. Husain, S.H. Raza and F. N. Souza, though the group was dissolved in 1956, it was profoundly influential in changing the idiom of Indian art. Almost all India's major artists in the 1950s were associated with the group. Some of those who are well-known today are Bal Chabda, Manishi Dey, V. S. Gaitonde, Krishen Khanna, Ram Kumar, Tyeb Mehta, Beohar Rammanohar Sinha and Akbar Padamsee. Other famous painters like Jahar Dasgupta, Prokash Karmakar, John Wilkins, and Bijon Choudhuri enriched the art culture of India. They have become the icon of modern Indian art. Art historians like Prof. Rai Anand Krishna have also referred to those works of modern artistes that reflect Indian ethos.
Also, the increase in the discourse about Indian art, in English as well as vernacular Indian languages, appropriated the way art was perceived in the art schools. Critical approach became rigorous, critics like Geeta Kapur, R . Siva Kumar, contributed to re-thinking contemporary art practice in India.Their voices represented Indian art not only in India but across the world. The critics also had an important role as curators of important exhibitions, re-defining modernism and Indian-art.
Indian Art got a boost with the economic liberalization of the country since the early 1990s. Artists from various fields now started bringing in varied styles of work. Post-liberalization Indian art thus works not only within the confines of academic traditions but also outside it. In this phase, artists have introduced even newer concepts which have hitherto not been seen in Indian art. Devajyoti Ray has introduced a new genre of art called Pseudorealism. Pseudorealist Art is an original art style that has been developed entirely on the Indian soil. Pseudorealism takes into account the Indian concept of abstraction and uses it to transform regular scenes of Indian life into a fantastic images.
Vernacular art is an art alive (contemporary art), based on the past (the myths, the traditions and the religion) and made by defined groups. Vernacular art is based on the collective memory of this group. Examples of Vernacular Indian Painting are Tribal Painting: Bhil painting, Warli painting, Gond painting, Santhal painting, Saora painting, Kurumba painting and Rural Painting are Pattachitra painting, Madhubani painting, Bhojpuri Painting, Manjusha Painting,Kalamkari painting , Kolam painting, Kalam painting, Mandana Paintings
Indian_miniature_paintings,https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Indian_miniature_paintings,"Indian miniature paintings are a class of paintings originating from India. Made on canvases a few inches in length and width, the Indian miniatures are noted for the amount of details that the artist encapsulates within the minute canvas frame; and the characteristic sensitivity with which the human, divine and natural forms are portrayed.
They depict a variety of topics such as legends and myths, human passions and pains, aspirations, and physicality. From their origins in cave paintings, to the later Mughal and Pahari schools, the Indian miniatures represent a diversity of styles and themes, varying between the religious and the secular. Today most of these forms have perished, and are no longer practiced, due to the decline in royal patronage, and subsequent changes in the country's socio-cultural scenes. However, several of these canvases today survive in museums and private collections, defining India, her lifestyle and the aesthetic idiom of her past, as well as the essence of her soil, her creative imagination, colours, and thought.
In India, painting, one of the significant branches of chitra, has a divine origin. It is said to have emerged as a spontaneous act by Vishnu, who unconsciously sketched a portrait of Urvashi on his thigh, enthralled by the ravishing beauty of the apsara. It was then passed on to Viswakarma, who taught the art of painting to the rest of mankind as per Vishnu's wishes. Chitra has several connotations, and forms an important part of the various Shilpa and the Agamas text. The earliest paintings, as per anthropological evidences have been found in the rock-cut shelters such as in Bhim-Betaka in Bhopal. Seven distinct phases of rock art have been discovered here, with the earliest dating back to 10,000 B.C. Indus pottery defines the next stage of painting where the surfaces of earthen pots became the artist's canvas, these paintings were characterised by geometrical patterns, bright colours, floral themes, etc. The two epics Ramayana and Mahabharata provide depict several of the characters engaged in art activities. For instance, in Ayodhya, there was a permanent space designated as chitra-vithi, which was supervised by Lakshmana, the brother of Ram. In Bhagavata Purana, Banasura's daughter, Usha has a friend, Chitralekha, who is a skilled painter who painted Aniruddha, Krishna's grandson, after hearing about Usha's dream about him. The most glorious phase of Indian art spanned from the 4th-7th Centuries as seen in the delicate and exquisite murals at Ajanta Ellora caves, temples, monasteries, etc.
This form of painting, in the Indian subcontinent, emerged during the 10th Century. The earliest known example is the 999 A.D.-illustrated Buddhist text Prajnaparamita, produced on a palm leaf. There are also the Kalpasutra folios which have been discovered during the 10th-14th centuries. The Kalpasutra tradition seems to have continued till 16th Century. These votive portable paintings earned the patronage of travelers, devotees and traders. The Mandu Kalpasutra, for instance, dated 1439 A.D., was rendered for Mandu, a Jain monk. The introduction of paper replaced the palm-leaf and revolutionised the art-scenario post-14th Century. Moreover, new mineral colours and pigments too were introduced in addition to the prior colours. Paper was tougher, smoother, and had a better colour-absorbing surface. Meanwhile, the Bhakti movement increased the demand for votive representations, while simultaneously rulers too began patronising painters to have their artistic styles preserved and reflected on the canvas. Against this scenario, the production of miniatures became profit-oriented, and artists began to carve their own distinctions while competing with others. This also gave birth to various art schools, marking a shift from the religious to secular themes, and feudal lords replaced the traders as patrons. The major chunk of miniatures, and consequent medieval art forms, evolved from the 15th to the 19th century.
The Indian miniatures are characterised by a direct expressive quality, and remarkable transparency where lines, colours, forms, etc., synthesize to expose all that is depicted in the canvas. Nothing is concealed and it is this frankness that potentially moves the viewers, emotionally, and generates a transcendental delight in them. Several Indian texts ranging from the Buddhist Jatakas, Jain Kalpasutras, the two Hindu epics, Bhagavata-Purana, Kalidasa's Shakuntala, Rasamanjari, Gita-Govinda by Jayadeva, Rasikapriya, Bihari-Satsai, and Janamsakhi are frequently portrayed in these miniatures. Persian texts like Shahnama, Tutinama, Hamzanama, Mughal memoirs like Baburnama, Akbarnama, etc., folk legends like Bazbahadur-Roopmati, Dhola-Maru, Laila-Majnun, Nala-Damayanti, Panchatantra, etc., are also the staple content of Indian miniatures. Abstract emotions of love, pain and grief; beauty and nature; the Ragamalas, Baramasa, Tantra; history of court and village lives, various festivals and scenes of pleasure too are found in these paintings. Calligraphy played a significant role from the Buddhist and Jain depictions in the medieval age; while portraiture was encouraged by Akbar though only of male royal personages, while Jahangir allowed portraits of royal females such as Nur Jahan. Nature played a very important role in these paintings, and despite the minute space, the expansive detailing seemed to seamlessly unite the world of nature and man on the canvas space. Decorated borders, intricate lines, balanced and perfectly executed compositions, unique shades and colour palettes, scenic depictions, and thematic portrayals depart a mysticism and emotive appeal that characterises the essence of Indian miniatures.
The Pala and Jain schools comprise the early miniature styles, while the later schools comprise the Rajasthani, Mughal, Pahari, and Deccan schools. Malwa, Raghogarh, and Orchha-Datia, often grouped under the Rajasthani school, form separate schools of Central India. Depending on stylistic variations, the Mughal miniatures can be further classified into the early, later and provincial Mughal schools, with the last referring to the art styles that emerged in the subas. On the other hand, Kangra, Basohli, Garhwal, etc., form different sub-schools of the Pahari miniature style.
The paintings of the Pala school were produced in Bengal and the surrounding areas, and depict narratives, events, and tales from the life of Buddha. These paintings, composed on palm-leaf manuscripts, were created during the 8th-11th Century, under the patronage of Pala rulers. The Jain-Kalpasutra paintings depict the life of the Thirthankara Mahavira and Parashvanath. These paintings of the Jain school are made on palm-leaf or on cloth, and are characterised by short-statured men with deep protruding eyes, angular facial features, pointed noses, bright ornaments, and costumes, painted in gold, warm colours with active lines, connoting a distinct rhythm and vitality of movement.
The principal centres of Rajasthani miniatures included Mewar, Bundi, Bikaner, Jodhpur, Kishangarh, Jaipur, over fifteen smaller states, and thikanas. The Rajasthani miniatures are exceptionally expressive, characterised by primitive vigour, and exude the rich fragrant essence of the soil and the land. Serialised illustrations of texts and legends, depictions of Durbar scenes, festivals, processions, huntings, and harem life, have precedence over portraiture. The image of Krishna-Radha gave the Rajasthani painters an eternal source of sensuous delight, an ideal of the shringara rasa, and a way to transcend beyond the material into the spiritual.
Mewar paintings developed a sensitive portrayal of Hindu myths and legends. Sahibdin, a Muslim artist, interestingly pioneered the Mewar idiom. Nathdwara became an important centre of Mewar art. This was the result of the establishment of the Shreenathji shrine here. Soon, the image of Shreenath became a dominant theme in these paintings. The Kotah paintings excelled in the depictions of hunting scenes, realistic portrayals of nature, and human figures. The Bundi miniatures too are superbly composed and reflect both secular as well as religious themes. The Bikaner miniatures are characterised by their affinity to the Mughal style, their portrayals of the Durbar scenes, delicate female forms and robust male figures. Art from Jodhpur, also known as the Marwar style, is defined by large thick eyes on well-defined physical features. The Kishangarh artists championed the Bani-Thani figures, that is the perfect model of womanhood, and were inspired by Raja Sawant Singh. A unique lyricism, elegance and rhythm characterise these masterpieces. The Jaipur style is distinguished by the presence of tall figures, with delicate eyes, ornate background, embellished costumes, etc., achieved by the amalgamation of Mughal and Rajasthani styles. The Malwa miniatures are beautifully composed and emotionally charged, while the Orchha-Datia styles (also, known as the Bundelkhand school) are dominated by episodes from the Ramayana, Bhagavata-Purana, folk narratives, and blue-black shades.
The Mughal art style was born in the hands of Akbar, whose liberalism led to the unification of Hindu and Islamic elements of art. His court saw the translations of Persian and Sanskrit texts, and illustrations of the same were carried on simultaneously. Miniatures produced during Jahangir's time testify to his sensitive eye for beauty. The paintings have a poetic fervour, neat lines, life-like portrayals of birds, and animals, etc. The influence of European styles too are visible in the paintings of this time owing to Jahangir's interactions with the Europeans. Portraiture and random depictions gained immense popularity during Shah Jahan's time. Serialisation of romances like Dara Sikhoh and Ranadil were significant in the miniatures of this period. Shah Jahan was a man of romantic and poetic fervour, and the paintings produced under his patronage show a delicate and typical softness. The Mughal miniature artists shifted to the subas with the ascendance of Aurangzeb, under whose rigid rule patronage was suspended, and all art was abhorred. The paintings which developed in the subas were referred to as the Provincial Mughal Miniatures.
In Deccan, a fresh art style had started to develop, after areas of Deccan were conquered by Islamic rulers who brought them with their art styles, that mingled with the indigenous art forms alongside the influences from Persia and Turkey. Some of the distinct markers of this school are the exceptional synthesis of colour palette, the comely human figures, rich decorations, and indigenous ornamental patterns, etc.
The Pahari miniature style developed at various centres spread across the lower Himalayan regions and Punjab hills. The major centres were Basohli, Guler, Chamba, Mandi, and Kangra, while the minor ones included those at Jammu, Bilaspur, Garhwal and Punjab. Pahari paintings derive their timelessness and emotive quality from the compositional details, rich symbolism, sensitive portrayals of humans, and natural landscapes. They have an unmatched serenity, and picturesque quality. The Basohli style is marked by the indiscriminate use of the lotus symbol, and human figures with large eyes, and broad foreheads. Royal portraits of the Chamba sub-school are well known. It is also noted for its unique technique of mixing colours, and representation of womenfolk. Guler style is defined by rounded faces, refined lines, and a sensitive depictions of nature. Kangra paintings represent the pinnacle of Pahari miniatures, and Himalayan art, characterised by mature technical finesse, and portraitural quality that imparts an almost pulsating softness of music, emotions, and colours. The Radha-Krishna legend forms the primary theme of the Kangra school."
Indian art consists of a variety of art forms, including painting, sculpture, pottery, and textile arts such as woven silk. Geographically, it spans the entire Indian subcontinent, including what is now India, Pakistan, Bangladesh, Sri Lanka, Nepal, Bhutan , and at times eastern Afghanistan. A strong sense of design is characteristic of Indian art and can be observed in its modern and traditional forms.
The origin of Indian art can be traced to prehistoric settlements in the 3rd millennium BCE. On its way to modern times, Indian art has had cultural influences, as well as religious influences such as Hinduism, Buddhism, Jainism, Sikhism and Islam. In spite of this complex mixture of religious traditions, generally, the prevailing artistic style at any time and place has been shared by the major religious groups.
In historic art, sculpture in stone and metal, mainly religious, has survived the Indian climate better than other media and provides most of the best remains. Many of the most important ancient finds that are not in carved stone come from the surrounding, drier regions rather than India itself. Indian funeral and philosophic traditions exclude grave goods, which is the main source of ancient art in other cultures.
Indian artist styles historically followed Indian religions out of the subcontinent, having an especially large influence in Tibet, South East Asia and China. Indian art has itself received influences at times, especially from Central Asia and Iran, and Europe.
Rock art of India includes rock relief carvings, engravings and paintings, some (but by no means all) from the South Asian Stone Age. It is estimated there are about 1300 rock art sites with over a quarter of a million figures and figurines. The earliest rock carvings in India were discovered by Archibald Carlleyle, twelve years before the Cave of Altamira in Spain, although his work only came to light much later via J Cockburn (1899).
Dr. V. S. Wakankar discovered several painted rock shelters in Central India, situated around the Vindhya mountain range. Of these, the c. 750 sites making up the Bhimbetka rock shelters have been enrolled as a UNESCO World Heritage Site; the earliest paintings are some 10,000 years old. The paintings in these sites commonly depicted scenes of human life alongside animals, and hunts with stone implements. Their style varied with region and age, but the most common characteristic was a red wash made using a powdered mineral called geru, which is a form of iron oxide (hematite).
Despite its widespread and sophistication, the Indus Valley civilisation seems to have taken no interest in public large-scale art, unlike many other early civilizations. A number of gold, terracotta and stone figurines of girls in dancing poses reveal the presence of some forms of dance. Additionally, the terracotta figurines included cows, bears, monkeys, and dogs.
Much the most common form of figurative art found is small carved seals. Thousands of steatite seals have been recovered, and their physical character is fairly consistent. In size they range from 3⁄4 inch to 11⁄2 inches square. In most cases they have a pierced boss at the back to accommodate a cord for handling or for use as personal adornment. Seals have been found at Mohenjo-Daro depicting a figure standing on its head, and another, on the Pashupati Seal, sitting cross-legged in a yoga-like pose. This figure has been variously identified. Sir John Marshall identified a resemblance to the Hindu god, Shiva.
The animal depicted on a majority of seals at sites of the mature period has not been clearly identified. Part bull, part zebra, with a majestic horn, it has been a source of speculation. As yet, there is insufficient evidence to substantiate claims that the image had religious or cultist significance, but the prevalence of the image raises the question of whether or not the animals in images of the IVC are religious symbols. The most famous piece is the bronze Dancing Girl of Mohenjo-Daro, which shows remarkably advanced modelling of the human figure for this early date.
After the end of the Indus Valley Civilization, there is a surprising absence of art of any great degree of sophistication until the Buddhist era. It is thought that this partly reflects the use of perishable organic materials such as wood.
The millennium following the collapse of the Indus Valley civilisation, coinciding with the Indo-Aryan migration during the Vedic period, is devoid of anthropomorphical depictions. It has been suggested that the early Vedic religion focused exclusively on the worship of purely ""elementary forces of nature by means of elaborate sacrifices"", which did not lend themselves easily to anthropomorphological representations. Various artefacts may belong to the Copper Hoard culture (2nd millennium BCE), some of them suggesting anthropomorphological characteristics. Interpretations vary as to the exact signification of these artifacts, or even the culture and the periodization to which they belonged. Some examples of artistic expression also appear in abstract pottery designs during the Black and red ware culture (1450-1200 BCE) or the Painted Grey Ware culture (1200-600 BCE), with finds in a wide area, including the area of Mathura.
After a gap of about a thousand years, most of the early finds correspond to what is called the ""second period of urbanization"" in the middle of the 1st millennium BCE. The anthropomorphic depiction of various deities apparently started in the middle of the 1st millennium BCE, possibly as a consequence of the influx of foreign stimuli initiated with the Achaemenid conquest of the Indus Valley, and the rise of alternative local faiths challenging Vedism, such as Buddhism, Jainism and local popular cults.
The north Indian Maurya Empire flourished from 322 BCE to 185 BCE, and at its maximum extent controlled all of the sub-continent except the extreme south as well as influences from Indian ancient traditions, and Ancient Persia, as shown by the Pataliputra capital.
The emperor Ashoka, who died in 232 BCE, adopted Buddhism about half-way through his 40-year reign, and patronized several large stupas at key sites from the life of the Buddha, although very little decoration from the Mauryan period survives, and there may not have been much in the first place. There is more from various early sites of Indian rock-cut architecture.
The most famous survivals are the large animals surmounting several of the Pillars of Ashoka, which showed a confident and boldly mature style and craft and first of its kind iron casting without rust until date, which was in use by vedic people in rural areas of the country, though we have very few remains showing its development. The famous detached Lion Capital of Ashoka, with four animals, was adopted as the official Emblem of India after Indian independence. Mauryan sculpture and architecture is characterized by a very fine Mauryan polish given to the stone, which is rarely found in later periods.
Many small popular terracotta figurines are recovered in archaeology, in a range of often vigorous if somewhat crude styles. Both animals and human figures, usually females presumed to be deities, are found.
Yakshas seem to have been the object of an important cult in the early periods of Indian history, many of them being known such as Kubera, king of the Yakshas, Manibhadra or Mudgarpani. The Yakshas are a broad class of nature-spirits, usually benevolent, but sometimes mischievous or capricious, connected with water, fertility, trees, the forest, treasure and wilderness, and were the object of popular worship. Many of them were later incorporated into Buddhism, Jainism or Hinduism.
In the 2nd century BCE, Yakshas became the focus of the creation of colossal cultic images, typically around 2 meters or more in height, which are considered as probably the first Indian anthropomorphic productions in stone. Although few ancient Yaksha statues remain in good condition, the vigor of the style has been applauded, and expresses essentially Indian qualities. They are often pot-bellied, two-armed and fierce-looking. The Yakshas are often depicted with weapons or attributes, such as the Yaksha Mudgarpani who in the right hand holds a mudgar mace, and in the left hand the figure of a small standing devotee or child joining hands in prayer. It is often suggested that the style of the colossal Yaksha statuary had an important influence on the creation of later divine images and human figures in India. The female equivalent of the Yakshas were the Yakshinis, often associated with trees and children, and whose voluptuous figures became omnipresent in Indian art.
Some Hellenistic influence, such as the geometrical folds of the drapery or the walking stance of the statues, has been suggested. According to John Boardman, the hem of the dress in the monumental early Yaksha statues is derived from Greek art. Describing the drapery of one of these statues, John Boardman writes: ""It has no local antecedents and looks most like a Greek Late Archaic mannerism"", and suggests it is possibly derived from the Hellenistic art of nearby Bactria where this design is known.
In the production of colossal Yaksha statues carved in the round, which can be found in several locations in northern India, the art of Mathura is considered as the most advanced in quality and quantity during this period.
The major survivals of Buddhist art begin in the period after the Mauryans, from which good quantities of sculpture survives. Some key sites are Sanchi, Bharhut and Amaravati, some of which remain in situ, with others in museums in India or around the world. Stupas were surrounded by ceremonial fences with four profusely carved toranas or ornamental gateways facing the cardinal directions. These are in stone, though clearly adopting forms developed in wood. They and the walls of the stupa itself can be heavily decorated with reliefs, mostly illustrating the lives of the Buddha. Gradually life-size figures were sculpted, initially in deep relief, but then free-standing.
Mathura was the most important centre in this development, which applied to Hindu and Jain art as well as Buddhist. The facades and interiors of rock-cut chaitya prayer halls and monastic viharas have survived better than similar free-standing structures elsewhere, which were for long mostly in wood. The caves at Ajanta, Karle, Bhaja and elsewhere contain early sculpture, often outnumbered by later works such as iconic figures of the Buddha and bodhisattvas, which are not found before 100 CE at the least.
Buddhism developed an increasing emphasis on statues of the Buddha, which was greatly influenced by Hindu and Jain religious figurative art, The figures of this period which were also influenced by the Greco-Buddhist art of the centuries after the conquests of Alexander the Great. This fusion developed in the far north-west of India, especially Gandhara in modern Afghanistan and Pakistan. The Indian Kushan Empire spread from Central Asia to include northern India in the early centuries CE, and briefly commissioned large statues that were portraits of the royal dynasty.
With the fall of the Maurya Empire, control of India was returned to the older custom of regional dynasties, one of the most significant of which was the Shunga Dynasty (c. 185 BCE – 72 BCE) of central India. During this period, as well as during the Satavahana Dynasty which occurred concurrently with the Shunga Dynasty in south India, some of the most significant early Buddhist architecture was created. Arguably, the most significant architecture of this dynasty is the stupa, a religious monument which usually holds a sacred relic of Buddhism. These relics were often, but not always, in some way directly connected to the Buddha. Due to the fact that these stupas contained remains of the Buddha himself, each stupa was venerated as being an extension of the Buddha's body, his enlightenment, and of his achievement of nirvana. The way in which Buddhists venerate the stupa is by walking around it in a clockwise manner.
One of the most notable examples of the Buddhist stupa from the Shunga Dynasty is The Great Stupa at Sanchi, which was thought to be founded by the Mauryan emperor Ashoka c. 273 BCE – 232 BCE during the Maurya Empire. The Great Stupa was enlarged to its present diameter of 120 feet, covered with a stone casing, topped with a balcony and umbrella, and encircled with a stone railing during the Shunga Dynasty c. 150 BCE – 50 BCE.
In addition to architecture, another significant art form of the Shunga Dynasty is the elaborately moulded terracotta plaques. As seen in previous examples from the Mauryan Empire, a style in which surface detail, nudity, and sensuality is continued in the terracotta plaques of the Shunga Dynasty. The most common figural representations seen on these plaques are women, some of which are thought to be goddesses, who are mostly shown as bare-chested and wearing elaborate headdresses.
The Satavahana dynasty ruled in central India, and sponsored many large Buddhist monuments, stupas, temples, and prayer-halls, including the Amaravati Stupa, the Karla Caves, and the first phase of the Ajanta Caves.
Stupas are religious monuments built on burial mounds, which contain relics beneath a solid dome. Stupas in different areas of India may vary in structure, size, and design; however, their representational meanings are quite similar. They are designed based on a mandala, a graph of cosmos specific to Buddhism. A traditional stupa has a railing that provides a sacred path for Buddhist followers to practice devotional circumambulation in ritual settings. Also, ancient Indians considered caves as sacred places since they were inhabited by holy men and monks. A chaitya was constructed from a cave.
Relief sculptures of Buddhist figures and epigraphs written in Brahmi characters are often found in divine places specific to Buddhism. To celebrate the divine, Satavahana people also made stone images as the decoration in Buddhist architectures. Based on the knowledge of geometry and geology, they created ideal images using a set of complex techniques and tools such as chisels, hammers, and compasses with iron points.
In addition, delicate Satavahana coins show the capacity of creating art in that period. The Satavahanas issued coins primarily in copper, lead and potin. Later on, silver came into use when producing coins. The coins usually have detailed portraits of rulers and inscriptions written in the language of Tamil and Telugu.
Officially established by Kujula Kadphises, the first Kushan emperor who united the Yuezhi tribes, the Kushan empire was a syncretic empire in central and southern Asia, including the regions of Gandhara and Mathura in northern India. From 127 to 151 CE, Gandharan reached its peak under the reign of Kanishka the Great. In this period, Kushan art inherited the Greco-Buddhist art. Mahayana Buddhism flourished, and the depictions of Buddha as a human form first appeared in art. Wearing a monk's robe and a long length of cloth draped over the left shoulder and around the body, the Buddha was depicted with 32 major lakshanas (distinguishing marks), including a golden-colored body, an ushnisha (a protuberance) on the top of his head, heavy earrings, elongated earlobes, long arms, the impression of a chakra (wheel) on the palms of his hands and the soles of his feet, and the urna (a mark between his eyebrows).
One of the hallmarks of Gandharan art is its relation to naturalism of Hellenistic art. The naturalistic features found in Gandharan sculptures include the three-dimensional treatment of the drapery, with unregularized folds that are in realistic patterns of random shape and thickness. The physical form of the Buddha and his bodhisattvas are well-defined, solid, and muscular, with swelling chests, arms, and abdomens. Buddhism and Buddhism art spread to Central Asia and the far East across Bactria and Sogdia, where the Kushan Empire met the Han Dynasty of China.
The Gupta period is generally regarded as a classic peak of north Indian art for all the major religious groups. Although painting was evidently widespread, and survives in the Ajanta Caves, the surviving works are almost all religious sculpture.
The period saw the emergence of the iconic carved stone deity in Hindu art, as well as the Buddha-figure and Jain tirthankara figures, these last often on a very large scale. The main centres of sculpture were Mathura Sarnath, and Gandhara, the last the centre of Greco-Buddhist art.
The Gupta period marked the ""golden age"" of classical Hinduism, and saw the earliest constructed Hindu temple architecture, though survivals are not numerous.
Over this period Hindu temple architecture matured into a number of regional styles, and a large proportion of the art historical record for this period consists of temple sculpture, much of which remains in place. The political history of the middle kingdoms of India saw India divided into many states, and since much of the grandest building was commissioned by rulers and their court, this helped the development of regional differences. Painting, both on a large scale on walls, and in miniature forms, was no doubt very widely practiced, but survivals are rare. Medieval bronzes have most commonly survived from either the Tamil south, or the Himalayan foothills.
Inscriptions on the Pillars of Ashoka mention coexistence of the northern kingdoms with the triumvirate of Chola, Chera and Pandya Tamil dynasties, situated south of the Vindhya mountains. The medieval period witnessed the rise and fall of these kingdoms, in conjunction with other kingdoms in the area. It is during the decline and resurgence of these kingdoms that Hinduism was renewed. It fostered the construction of numerous temples and sculptures.
The Shore Temple at Mamallapuram constructed by the Pallavas symbolizes early Hindu architecture, with its monolithic rock relief and sculptures of Hindu deities. They were succeeded by Chola rulers who were prolific in their pursuit of the arts. The Great Living Chola Temples of this period are known for their maturity, grandeur and attention to detail, and have been recognized as a UNESCO Heritage Site. The Chola period is also known for its bronze sculptures, the lost-wax casting technique and fresco paintings. Thanks to the Hindu kings of the Chalukya dynasty, Jainism flourished alongside Islam evidenced by the fourth of the Badami cave temples being Jain instead of Vedic. The kingdoms of South India continued to rule their lands until the Muslim invasions that established sultanates there and destroyed much of the temples and marvel examples of architectures and sculptures
Other Hindu states are now mainly known through their surviving temples and their attached sculpture. These include Badami Chalukya architecture (5th to 6th centuries), Western Chalukya architecture (11th to 12th centuries) and Hoysala architecture (11th to 14th centuries), all centred on modern Karnataka.
In east India, Odisha and West Bengal, Kalinga architecture was the broad temple style, with local variants, before the Muslim conquest.
In antiquity, Bengal was a pioneer of painting in Asia under the Pala Empire. Miniature and scroll painting flourished during the Mughal Empire. Kalighat painting or Kalighat Pat originated in the 19th century Bengal, in the vicinity of Kalighat Kali Temple of Kolkata, and from being items of souvenir taken by the visitors to the Kali temple, the paintings over a period of time developed as a distinct school of Indian painting. From the depiction of Hindu gods other mythological characters, the Kalighat paintings developed to reflect a variety of themes.
Although Islamic conquests in India were made as early as the first half of the 10th century, it wasn't until the Mughal Empire that one observes emperors with a patronage for the fine arts. Emperor Humayun, during his reestablishment of the Delhi Sultanate in 1555, brought with him Mir Sayyid Ali and Abd al-Samad, two of the finest painters from Persian Shah Tahmasp's renowned atelier.
During the reign of Akbar (1556–1605), the number of painters grew from around 30 during the creation of the Hamzanama in the mid-1560s, to around 130 by the mid-1590s. According to court historian Abu'l-Fazal, Akbar was hands-on in his interest of the arts, inspecting his painters regularly and rewarding the best. It is during this time that Persian artists were attracted to bringing their unique style to the empire. Indian elements were present in their works from the beginning, with the incorporation of local Indian flora and fauna that were otherwise absent from the traditional Persian style. The paintings of this time reflected the vibrancy and inclusion of Akbar's kingdom, with production of Persian miniatures, the Rajput paintings (including the Kangra school) and the Pahari style of Northern India. They also influenced the Company style watercolor paintings created during the British rule many years later.
With the death of Akbar, his son Jahangir (1605–1627) took the throne. He preferred each painter work on a single piece rather than the collaboration fostered during Akbar's time. This period marks the emergence of distinct individual styles, notably Bishan Das, Manohar Das, Abu al-Hasan, Govardhan, and Daulat. Jahangir himself had the capability to identify the work of each individual artist, even if the work was unnamed. The Razmnama (Persian translation of the Hindu epic Mahabharata) and an illustrated memoir of Jahangir, named Tuzuk-i Jahangiri, were created under his rule. Jahangir was succeeded by Shah Jahan (1628–1658), whose most notable architectural contribution is the Taj Mahal. Paintings under his rule were more formal, featuring court scenes, in contrast to the personal styles from his predecessor's time. Aurangzeb (1658–1707), who held increasingly orthodox Sunni beliefs, forcibly took the throne from his father Shah Jahan. With a ban of music and painting in 1680, his reign saw the decline of Mughal patronage of the arts.
As painting declined in the imperial court, artists and the general influence of Mughal painting spread to the princely courts and cities of north India, where both portraiture, the illustration of the Indian epics, and Hindu religious painting developed in many local schools and styles. Notable among these were the schools of Rajput, Pahari, Deccan, Kangra painting.
The last empire in southern India has left spectacular remains of Vijayanagara architecture, especially at Hampi, Karnataka, often heavily decorated with sculpture. These developed the Chola tradition. After the Mughal conquest, the temple tradition continued to develop, mainly in the expansion of existing temples, which added new outer walls with increasingly large gopurams, often dwarfing the older buildings in the centre. These became usually thickly covered with plaster statues of deities and other religious figures, which need have their brightly coloured paint kept renewed at intervals so they do not erode away.
In South-Central India, during the late fifteenth century after the Middle kingdoms, the Bahmani sultanate disintegrated into the Deccan sultanates centered at Bijapur, Golconda, Ahmadnagar, Bidar, and Berar. They used vedic techniques of metal casting, stone carving, and painting, as well as a distinctive architectural style with the addition of citadels and tombs from Mughal architecture. For instance, the Baridi dynasty (1504–1619) of Bidar saw the invention of bidri ware, which was adopted from Vedic and Maurya period ashoka pillars of zinc mixed with copper, tin, and lead and inlaid with silver or brass, then covered with a mud paste containing sal ammoniac, which turned the base metal black, highlighting the colour and sheen of the inlaid metal. Only after the Mughal conquest of Ahmadnagar in 1600 did the Persian influence patronized by the Turco-Mongol Mughals begin to affect Deccan art.
British colonial rule had a great impact on Indian art, especially from the mid-19th century onwards. Many old patrons of art became less wealthy and influential, and Western art more ubiquitous as the British Empire established schools of art in major cities. The oldest, the Government College of Fine Arts, Chennai, was established in 1850. In major cities with many Europeans, the Company style of small paintings became common, created by Indian artists working for European patrons of the East India Company. The style mainly used watercolour, to convey soft textures and tones, in a style combining influences from Western prints and Mughal painting. By 1858, the British government took over the task of administration of India under the British Raj. Many commissions by Indian princes were now wholly or partly in Western styles, or the hybrid Indo-Saracenic architecture. The fusion of Indian traditions with European style at this time is evident from Raja Ravi Varma's oil paintings of sari-clad women in a graceful manner.
The Bengal School of Art commonly referred as Bengal School, was an art movement and a style of Indian painting that originated in Bengal, primarily Kolkata and Shantiniketan, and flourished throughout the Indian subcontinent, during the British Raj in the early 20th century. Also known as 'Indian style of painting' in its early days, it was associated with Indian nationalism (swadeshi) and led by Abanindranath Tagore (1871–1951), but was also promoted and supported by British arts administrators like E. B. Havell, the principal of the Government College of Art and Craft, Kolkata from 1896; eventually it led to the development of the modern Indian painting.
Tagore later attempted to develop links with Japanese artists as part of an aspiration to construct a pan-Asianist model of art. Through the paintings of 'Bharat Mata', Abanindranath established the pattern of patriotism. Painters and artists of Bengal school were Nandalal Bose, M.A.R Chughtai, Sunayani Devi (sister of Abanindranath Tagore), Manishi Dey, Mukul Dey, Kalipada Ghoshal, Asit Kumar Haldar, Sudhir Khastgir, Kshitindranath Majumdar, Sughra Rababi.
Between 1920 and 1925, Gaganendranath pioneered experiments in modernist painting. Partha Mitter describes him as ""the only Indian painter before the 1940s who made use of the language and syntax of Cubism in his painting"". From 1925 onwards, the artist developed a complex post-cubist style.
With the Swadeshi Movement gaining momentum by 1905, Indian artists attempted to resuscitate the cultural identities suppressed by the British, rejecting the Romanticized style of the Company paintings and the mannered work of Raja Ravi Varma and his followers. Thus was created what is known today as the Bengal School of Art, led by the reworked Asian styles (with an emphasis on Indian nationalism) of Abanindranath Tagore (1871–1951), who has been referred to as the father of Modern Indian art. Other artists of the Tagore family, such as Rabindranath Tagore (1861–1941) and Gaganendranath Tagore (1867–1938) as well as new artists of the early 20th century such as Amrita Sher-Gil (1913–1941) were responsible for introducing Avant-garde western styles into Indian Art. Many other artists like Jamini Roy and later S.H. Raza took inspiration from folk traditions. In 1944, K.C.S. Paniker founded the Progressive Painters' Association (PPA) thus giving rise to the ""madras movement"" in art.
In 1947, India became independent of British rule. A group of six artists – K. H. Ara, S. K. Bakre, H. A. Gade, M.F. Husain, S.H. Raza and Francis Newton Souza – founded the Bombay Progressive Artists' Group in the year 1952, to establish new ways of expressing India in the post-colonial era. Though the group was dissolved in 1956, it was profoundly influential in changing the idiom of Indian art. Almost all India's major artists in the 1950s were associated with the group. Some of those who are well-known today are Bal Chabda, Manishi Dey, V. S. Gaitonde, Krishen Khanna, Ram Kumar, Tyeb Mehta, K. G. Subramanyan, A. Ramachandran, Devender Singh, Akbar Padamsee, John Wilkins, Himmat Shah and Manjit Bawa. Present-day Indian art is varied as it had been never before. Among the best-known artists of the newer generation include Bose Krishnamachari and Bikash Bhattacharjee.
Painting and sculpture remained important in the later half of the twentieth century, though in the work of leading artists such as Nalini Malani, Subodh Gupta, Narayanan Ramachandran, Vivan Sundaram, Jitish Kallat, GR Iranna, Bharati Kher, Chittravanu Muzumdar, they often found radical new directions. Bharti Dayal has chosen to handle the traditional Mithila painting in most contemporary way and created her own style through the exercises of her own imagination, they appear fresh and unusual.
The increase in discourse about Indian art, in English as well as vernacular Indian languages, changed the way art was perceived in the art schools. Critical approach became rigorous; critics like Geeta Kapur, R. Siva Kumar, Shivaji K. Panikkar, Ranjit Hoskote, amongst others, contributed to re-thinking contemporary art practice in India.
The first known sculpture in the Indian subcontinent is from the Indus Valley civilisation (3300–1700 BC), found in sites at Mohenjo-daro and Harappa in modern-day Pakistan. These include the famous small bronze male dancerNataraja. However such figures in bronze and stone are rare and greatly outnumbered by pottery figurines and stone seals, often of animals or deities very finely depicted. After the collapse of the Indus Valley civilization there is little record of sculpture until the Buddhist era, apart from a hoard of copper figures of (somewhat controversially) c. 1500 BCE from Daimabad.
The great tradition of Indian monumental sculpture in stone appears to begin relatively late, with the reign of Ashoka from 270 to 232 BCE, and the Pillars of Ashoka he erected around India, carrying his edicts and topped by famous sculptures of animals, mostly lions, of which six survive. Large amounts of figurative sculpture, mostly in relief, survive from Early Buddhist pilgrimage stupas, above all Sanchi; these probably developed out of a tradition using wood. Indeed, wood continued to be the main sculptural and architectural medium in Kerala throughout all historic periods until recent decades.
During the 2nd to 1st century BCE in far northern India, in the Greco-Buddhist art of Gandhara from what is now southern Afghanistan and northern Pakistan, sculptures became more explicit, representing episodes of the Buddha's life and teachings. Although India had a long sculptural tradition and a mastery of rich iconography, the Buddha was never represented in human form before this time, but only through some of his symbols. This may be because Gandharan Buddhist sculpture in modern Afghanistan displays Greek and Persian artistic influence. Artistically, the Gandharan school of sculpture is said to have contributed wavy hair, drapery covering both shoulders, shoes and sandals, acanthus leaf decorations, etc.
The pink sandstone Hindu, Jain and Buddhist sculptures of Mathura from the 1st to 3rd centuries CE reflected both native Indian traditions and the Western influences received through the Greco-Buddhist art of Gandhara, and effectively established the basis for subsequent Indian religious sculpture. The style was developed and diffused through most of India under the Gupta Empire (c. 320–550) which remains a ""classical"" period for Indian sculpture, covering the earlier Ellora Caves, though the Elephanta Caves are probably slightly later. Later large scale sculpture remains almost exclusively religious, and generally rather conservative, often reverting to simple frontal standing poses for deities, though the attendant spirits such as apsaras and yakshi often have sensuously curving poses. Carving is often highly detailed, with an intricate backing behind the main figure in high relief. The celebrated lost wax bronzes of the Chola dynasty (c. 850–1250) from south India, many designed to be carried in processions, include the iconic form of Shiva as Nataraja, with the massive granite carvings of Mahabalipuram dating from the previous Pallava dynasty. The Chola period is also remarkable for its sculptures and bronzes. Among the existing specimens in the various museums of the world and in the temples of South India may be seen many fine figures of Siva in various forms, Vishnu and his wife Lakshmi, Siva saints and many more.
The tradition and methods of Indian cliff painting gradually evolved throughout many thousands of years – there are multiple locations found with prehistoric art. The early caves included overhanging rock decorated with rock-cut art and the use of natural caves during the Mesolithic period (6000 BCE). Their use has continued in some areas into historic times. The Rock Shelters of Bhimbetka are on the edge of the Deccan Plateau where deep erosion has left huge sandstone outcrops. The many caves and grottos found there contain primitive tools and decorative rock paintings that reflect the ancient tradition of human interaction with their landscape, an interaction that continues to this day.
The oldest surviving frescoes of the historical period have been preserved in the Ajanta Caves with Cave 10 having some from the 1st century CE, though the larger and more famous groups are from the 5th century. Despite climatic conditions that tend to work against the survival of older paintings, in total there are known more than 20 locations in India with paintings and traces of former paintings of ancient and early medieval times (up to the 8th to 10th centuries CE), although these are just a tiny fraction of what would have once existed. The most significant frescoes of the ancient and early medieval period are found in the Ajanta, Bagh, Ellora, and Sittanavasal caves, the last being Jain of the 7th-10th centuries. Although many show evidence of being by artists mainly used to decorating palaces, no early secular wall-paintings survive.
The Chola fresco paintings were discovered in 1931 within the circumambulatory passage of the Brihadisvara Temple at Thanjavur, Tamil Nadu, and are the first Chola specimens discovered. Researchers have discovered the technique used in these frescoes. A smooth batter of limestone mixture is applied over the stones, which took two to three days to set. Within that short span, such large paintings were painted with natural organic pigments. During the Nayak period the Chola paintings were painted over. The Chola frescoes lying underneath have an ardent spirit of saivism is expressed in them. They probably synchronised with the completion of the temple by Rajaraja Cholan the Great.
Kerala mural painting has well-preserved fresco or mural or wall painting in temple walls in Pundarikapuram, Ettumanoor and Aymanam and elsewhere.
Although few Indian miniatures survive from before about 1000 CE, and some from the next few centuries, there was probably a considerable tradition. Those that survive are initially illustrations for Buddhist texts, later followed by Jain and Hindu equivalents, and the decline of Buddhist as well as the vulnerable support material of the palm-leaf manuscript probably explain the rarity of early examples.
Mughal painting in miniatures on paper developed very quickly in the late 16th century from the combined influence of the existing miniature tradition and artists trained in the Persian miniature tradition imported by the Mughal Emperor's court. New ingredients in the style were much greater realism, especially in portraits, and an interest in animals, plants and other aspects of the physical world. Deccan painting developed around the same time in the Deccan sultanates courts to the south, in some ways more vital, if less poised and elegant.
Miniatures either illustrated books or were single works for muraqqas or albums of painting and Islamic calligraphy. The style gradually spread in the next two centuries to influence painting on paper in both Muslim and Hindu princely courts, developing into a number of regional styles often called ""sub-Mughal"", including Rajput painting, Pahari painting, and finally Company painting, a hybrid watercolour style influenced by European art and largely patronized by the people of the British raj. In ""pahari"" (""mountain"") centres like that of Kangra painting the style remained vital and continued to develop into the early decades of the 19th century. From the mid-19th century Western-style easel paintings became increasingly painted by Indian artists trained in Government art schools.
The Indian subcontinent has the longest continuous legacy of jewellery-making, with a history of over 5,000 years. Using jewellery as a store of capital remains more common in India than in most modern societies, and gold appears always to have been strongly preferred for the metal. India and the surrounding areas were important sources of high-quality gemstones, and the jewellery of the ruling class is typified by using them lavishly. One of the first to start jewellery-making were the people of the Indus Valley civilization. Early remains are few, as they were not buried with their owners.
Wood was undoubtedly extremely important, but rarely survives long in the Indian climate. Organic animal materials such as ivory or bone were discouraged by the Dharmic religions, although Buddhist examples exist, such as the Begram ivories, many of Indian manufacture, but found in Afghanistan, and some relatively modern carved tusks. In Muslim settings they are more common.
Obscurity shrouds the period between the decline of the Harappans and the definite historic period starting with the Mauryas, and in the historical period, the earliest Indian religion to inspire major artistic monuments was Buddhism. Though there may have been earlier structures in wood that have been transformed into stone structures, there are no physical evidences for these except textual references. Soon after the Buddhists initiated rock-cut caves, Hindus and Jains started to imitate them at Badami, Aihole, Ellora, Salsette, Elephanta, Aurangabad and Mamallapuram and Mughals. It appears to be a constant in Indian art that the different religions shared a very similar artistic style at any particular period and place, though naturally adapting the iconography to match the religion commissioning them. Probably the same groups of artists worked for the different religions regardless of their own affiliations.
Buddhist art first developed during the Gandhara period and Amaravati periods around the 1st century BCE. It continued to flourish during the Gupta Periods and Pala periods that comprise the Golden Age of India, even as rulers became mostly Hindu. Buddhist art largely disappeared by the end of the first millennium, after which Hindu dynasties like the Pallava, Chola, Hoysala and Vijayanagara Empires developed their own styles.
There is no time line that divides the creation of rock-cut temples and free-standing temples built with cut stone as they developed in parallel. The building of free-standing structures began in the 5th century, while rock-cut temples continued to be excavated until the 12th century. An example of a free-standing structural temple is the Shore Temple, a part of the Mahabalipuram World Heritage Site, with its slender tower, built on the shore of the Bay of Bengal with finely carved granite rocks cut like bricks and dating from the 8th century.
Folk and tribal art in India takes on different manifestations through varied media such as pottery, painting, metalwork, paper-art, weaving and designing of objects such as jewellery and toys. These are not just aesthetic objects but in fact have an important significance in people's lives and are tied to their beliefs and rituals. The objects can range from sculpture, masks (used in rituals and ceremonies), paintings, textiles, baskets, kitchen objects, arms and weapons, and the human body itself (tattoos and piercings). There is a deep symbolic meaning that is attached to not only the objects themselves but also the materials and techniques used to produce them.
Often puranic gods and legends are transformed into contemporary forms and familiar images. Fairs, festivals, local heroes (mostly warriors) and local deities play a vital role in these arts (Example: Nakashi art from Telangana or Cherial Scroll Painting).
Folk art also includes the visual expressions of the wandering nomads. This is the art of people who are exposed to changing landscapes as they travel over the valleys and highlands of India. They carry with them the experiences and memories of different spaces and their art consists of the transient and dynamic pattern of life. The rural, tribal and arts of the nomads constitute the matrix of folk expression. Examples of folk arts are:
While most tribes and traditional folk artist communities are assimilated into the familiar kind of civilized life, they still continue to practice their art. Unfortunately though, market and economic forces have ensured that the numbers of these artists are dwindling. A lot of effort is being made by various NGOs and the Government of India to preserve and protect these arts and to promote them. Several scholars in India and across the world have studied these arts and some valuable scholarship is available on them. The folk spirit has a tremendous role to play in the development of art and in the overall consciousness of indigenous cultures.
The year 1997 bore witness to two parallel gestures of canon formation. On the one hand, the influential Baroda Group, a coalition whose original members included Vivan Sundaram, Ghulam Mohammed Sheikh, Bhupen Khakhar, and Nalini Malani—and which had left its mark on history in the form of the 1981 exhibition “Place for People”—was definitively historicized in 1997 with the publication of Contemporary Art in Baroda, an anthology of essays edited by Sheikh. On the other hand, the art historian R. Siva Kumar's benchmark exhibition and related publication, A Contextual Modernism, restored the Santiniketan artists—Rabindranath Tagore, Nandalal Bose, Benode Behari Mukherjee, and Ramkinkar Baij—to their proper place as the originators of an indigenously achieved yet transcultural modernism in the 1930s, well before the Progressives composed their manifesto in the late 1940s. Of the Santiniketan artists, Siva Kumar observed that they “reviewed traditional antecedents in relation to the new avenues opened up by cross-cultural contacts. They also saw it as a historical imperative. Cultural insularity, they realized, had to give way to eclecticism and cultural impurity.”
The idea of Contextual Modernism emerged in 1997 from R. Siva Kumar's Santiniketan: The Making of a Contextual Modernism as a postcolonial critical tool in the understanding of an alternative modernism in the visual arts of the erstwhile colonies like India, specifically that of the Santiniketan artists.
Several terms including Paul Gilroy's counter culture of modernity and Tani Barlow's Colonial modernity have been used to describe the kind of alternative modernity that emerged in non-European contexts. Professor Gall argues that 'Contextual Modernism' is a more suited term because “the colonial in colonial modernity does not accommodate the refusal of many in colonized situations to internalize inferiority. Santiniketan's artist teachers' refusal of subordination incorporated a counter vision of modernity, which sought to correct the racial and cultural essentialism that drove and characterized imperial Western modernity and modernism. Those European modernities, projected through a triumphant British colonial power, provoked nationalist responses, equally problematic when they incorporated similar essentialisms.”
According to R. Siva Kumar ""The Santiniketan artists were one of the first who consciously challenged this idea of modernism by opting out of both internationalist modernism and historicist indigenousness and tried to create a context sensitive modernism."" He had been studying the work of the Santiniketan masters and thinking about their approach to art since the early 80s. The practice of subsuming Nandalal Bose, Rabindranath Tagore, Ram Kinker Baij and Benode Behari Mukherjee under the Bengal School of Art was, according to Siva Kumar, misleading. This happened because early writers were guided by genealogies of apprenticeship rather than their styles, worldviews, and perspectives on art practice.
Contextual Modernism in the recent past has found its usage in other related fields of studies, specially in Architecture.